Skip to main content
web
texts
movies
audio
software
image
logosearch
Search the Archive
Search
 Search

upload
personSIGN IN
Full text of "Mrs. Radcliffe's novels. The Italian, The romance of the forest, The mysteries of Udolpho"
See other formats
Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



600078822X 



• 



MRS. RADCLIFFES 



NOVELS 



f 



THE ITALIAN 

THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 

THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO 



LONDON AND NEW YORK 
GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS 



?^ 



SIR WALTER SOOTTS NOVELS. 



Cheap EdUitm, infinuypafer cntr 
GUY MANNERING. 
THE ANTIQUARY. 
tTANHOE. 

THE FORTUNES OF NIGEL, 
THE HEART OF AflDLQTHIAN. 
THE BRIDE Of LAHUBRKOOR 
WAVERLEY. 
KOB ROY. 
KENILWORTH. 
THE PIRATB, 
THE MONASTERY. 
OLD MORTALITY. 
FEVERIL OF THE PEAK. 
QUENTIN DURWARD. 
ST. ROMAN'S WELL. 
THE ABBOT. 

THE Black dwarf »c 

WOODSTOCK, 

ANNE OF GEIERSTEIN. 

THE BETROTHED. 

THE FAIR MAID OF PERTH. 

THE SURGEON'S DAUGHTER, he. 

THE TALISMAN. 

COUNT ROBERT OF PARIS. 

REDGAUNTLST. 



THE ITALIAN 



OR 



THE CONFESSIONAL OF THE 



BLACK PENITENTS 



A ROMANCE 



BY 



ANN RADCLIFFE 



Ml 



AUTHOR OF "THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO AND "TUB XOMANCB OF THE FOREST 



He, wrapt in clouds of mystery and silence, 
Bro9ds o'er his passions, bodies them in deeds, 
And sends them forth on wings of Fate to others 
like the invisible Will, that guides us, 
Unheard, unknown, unsearchable ! 




LONDON AND NEW YORK 
GEORGE ROUT LEDGE AND SONS 



1877 



•251 . I . 



a a 



I. 



CAPTAIN MARRYATS NOVELS. 

Infancy covers ^ uniform with this Volume, 

Peter Simple. 

The King's Own. 

The Poacher. 

The Phantom Ship. 

Mr. Midshipman Easy, 

Monsieur Violet. 

Jacob Faithful. 

Valerie. 

Newton Forster. 

Japhet in Search of a Father, 

Frank Mildmay. 

Rattlin the Reefer. 

Percival Keene. 

The Dog Fiend. 

The Pacha of Many Tales. 

Olla Podrida. 



THE ITALIAN. 



ABOUT the year 1764, some English perceived the person who had appeared upon 
travellers in Italy, during one of their the steps, passing towards a confessional on 
excursions in the environs of Naples, happened the left, and, as he entered it, one of the 
to stop before the portico of the Santa Maria party pointed him out to the friar and inquired 
del Pianto, a church belonging to a very who he was. The friar, turning to look after 
ancient convent of the order of the Black him, did not immediatelv reply ; but, on the 
Penitents. The magnificence of this portico, question being repeated, he inclined his head, 
though impaired by time, excited so much as in a kind of obeisance, and calmly replied, 
admiration that the travellers were curious to " He is an assassin." 
survey the structure to which it belonged, and " An assassin I " exclaimed one of the 
with this intention they ascended the marble Englishmen ; "an assassin, and at liberty 1 " 
steps that led to it. An Italian gentleman, who was of the party, 

Within the shade of the portico, a person smiled at the astonishment of his friend, 
with folded arms, and eyes directed towards " He has sought sanctuary here," replied 
the ground, was pacing behind the pillars the the friar ; " within these walls he may not be 
whole extent of the pavement, and was molested." 

apparently so engaged by his o^vn thoughts *'Do your altars, then, protect the 
as not to observe that strangers were ap- murderer?" said the Englishman, 
proarhing. He turned, however, suddenly, •• He cou'd find shelter nowhere else," 
as if startled by the sound of steps, and answered $jbe U)^t pieekly. 
then, without further pausing, glided to a "This U astooishiag I " said the English* 
door that opened into the church, and man; "of what avail are your I'-iws. if the 
disappeared most atrocious crimmal may thus find shelter 

There was something too extraordinary in from them ? But how does he contrive to 
the appearance of this man, and too singular exist here ? He* is at least in danger of being 
in his conduct, to pass unnoticed by the starved." v 

visitors. He was of a tall thin figure, bend- " Pardon me," replied the friar, " there 
ing forward from the shoulders ; of a sallow are always people willing to. assist those who 
complexion and harsh features, and had an cannot assist themselves ; and, as the criminal 
eye which, as it looked up from the cloak may not leave the church in search of food, 
that muffled the lower part of his countenance, they bring it to him here. " 
seemed expressive of uncommon ferocity. •' Is this possible ? " said the Englishman, 

The travellers, on entering the church, turning to his Italian firiend. 
looked round for the stranger who had passed ' ' Why, the poor wretch must not- starve, " 
thither before them; but he was nowhere to replied the friend; "which he inevitably 
be seen, and, through all the shade of the would do if food were not brought to him. 
long aisles, only one other person appeared. But have you never, since your arrival in 
This was a friar of the adjoining convent, Italy, happened to see a person in the situa- 
who sometimes pointed out to visitors the tion of this man ? It is by no means an un- 
objects in the church which were most worthy common one." 

of attention, and who now, with this design, " Never," answered the Englishman^ "and 
approached the pwrty that had just entered. I can scarcely credit what I see now 1 " 

The interior of this edifice had nothing of "Why, my friend," observed thA.> Italian, 
the showy ornament and general splendour "assassinations are so frequent that if we 
which distinguish the churches of Italy, and were to show no mercy to such unfortunate 
particularly those of Naples ; but it exhibited persons, our cities would be half depopulated." 
a simplicity and grandeur of design con> In notice of this profound remark the 
siderably more interestmg to persons of taste. Englishman could only gravely bowi 
and a solemnity of light and shade much " But observe yonder confessional," added 
more suitable to promote the sublime eleva- the Italian, '* that beyond the pillars on the 
tion of devotion. left of the aisle, below a painted window. 

When the party had viewed thediflFerent Have you discovered it? The coloursr of the 
shrines and whatever had been judged worthy glass throw, instead of light, a shade over that 
of observation, and were returning through part of the church, which, perhaps, prevents 
an obscure aisle towards the portico, they your distinguishing what I mean." 



THE ITALIAN. 



The Englishman looked whither his friend 
pointed, and observed a confessional of joak, 
or some very dark wood, adjoining the wall, 
and remarked also that it was the same which 
the assassin had just entered. It consisted of 
three compartments, covered with a black 
canopy. In the central division was the chair 
of the confessor, elevated by several steps 
above the pavement of the church ; and on 
either hand was a small closet or box, with 
steps leading up to a grated partition, at 
which the penitent might kneel, and, con- 
cealed from observation, pour into the ear of 
the confessor the consciousness of crimes that 
lay heavy on his heart. 

"You observe it?" said the Italian. 

•«I do," replied the Englishman; "it is 
the same which the assassin has passed into, 
and I think it one of the most gloomy spots I 
ever beheld ; the view of it is enough to strike 
a criminal with despaur." 

"We in Italy are not so apt to despair," 
replied the Italian, smilingly. 

"Well, but what of this confessional?" 
inquired the Englishman. "The assassin 
entered it." 

" He has no relation with what I am about 
to mention," said the Italian; "but I wish 
you to mark the place, because some very ex- 
traordinary circumstances belong to it." 

" What are they ?" said the Englishman. 

" It is now several years since the confes- 
sion which is connected with them was made 
at that very confessional," added the Italian ; 
" the view of it, and the sight of this assassin, 
with your surprise at the liberty wh'ch is 
allowed him, led me to a recollection of the 
story. When you return to the hotel I will 
communicate it to you, if you have do plea- 
santer way of engaging your time." 

" I have a curiosity to hear it," replied the 
Englishman : "cannot you relate it now ?" 

" It is much too long to be rela'ed now — 
that would occupy a week. I have it in 
writing, and will send you the volume. A 
young student of Padua, who happened to be 
at Naples soon after this horrible confession 
became public " 

** Pardon me," interrupted the Englishman ; 
" that is surely very exiraordinary. I thought 
confessions were always held sacred by the 
priest to whom they were made. " 

" Your observation is reasonable, "rejoined 
the Italian. "The faith of the priest is never 
broken except by an especial command from 
a higher power ; and the circumstances must 
even then be very extraordinary to justify such 
a departure from the law. But when you read 
the narrative, your sm prise on this head will 
cease. I was going to tell you that it was 
written by a student of Padua, who, happening 
to be here soon after the affair became public, 
was so much struck with the facts that, partly 
as an exercise and partly in return for some 
triWnff servicer J had rendered him, he com- 



mitted them to paper for me. You will pef- 
ceive from the work, that this student was very 
young as to the arts of composition ; but the 
facts are what you require, and from these 
he has not deviated. But come, let us leave 
the church." 

"After I have taken another view of this 
solemn edifice," replied the Englishman, 
" and particularly of the confessional you have 
pointed to my notice." 

While the Englishman glanced his eye over 
the high roofs and along the solemn perspec* 
lives of the Santa del Pianto, he perceived 
the figure of the assassin stealing from the 
confessional across the choir ; and, shocked on 
again beholding him, he turned his eyes and 
hastily quitted the church. 

The friends then separated, and the Eng« 
lishman, soon after returning to his hotel, 
received the volume. He read as follows :— 



CHAPTER I. 

IT was in the church of San Lorenzo at 
Naples, in the year 1758, that Vincentio 
di Vivaldi first saw Ellena Rosalba. The 
sweetness and fine expression of her voice 
attracted his attention to her figure, which had 
a distinguished air of delicacy and grace ; but 
her' face was concealed in her veil. So much, 
indeed, was he fascmated by the voice that a 
most painful ouriosity was excited as to her 
countenance, which he fancied must express 
all the sensibility of character that the modu- 
lation of her tones indicated. He listened to 
their exquisite expression with a ra{H attention, 
and hardly withdrew his eyes from her person 
till the matin service had concluded, when he 
observed her leave the church with an aged 
lady, who leaned upon her arm and who 
appeared to be her mother. 

Vivaldi immediately followed their steps, 
determined to obtain, if possible, a view of 
Ellena's face, and to observe the home to 
which she should retire. They walked quickly, 
looking neither to the right nor left, and as 
they turned into the Strada di Toledo he 
had nearly lost them, but quickening his 
pace, and relinquishing the cautious distance 
he had hithero kept, he overtook them as they 
entered on the Terrazzo Nuovo, w^hich runs 
along the bay of Naples and leads towards 
the Gran Corso. He overtook them ; but the 
fair unknown still held her veil close, and he 
knew not how to introduce himself to her 
notice or to obtain a view of the features which 
excited his curiosity. He was embarrassed by 
a respectful timidity that mingled with his 
admiration, and which kept him silent, not* 
withstanding his wish to speak. 

In descending the last steps of the Terrazzo, 
however, the foot of the elder lady faltered ; 
and while Vivaldi hastened to assist her the 
breeze from (he water caught the veil, whidi 
Elleaa had no longer a hand sufficiently dis* 



TtiB ITALIAN, 5 

th^;A%hA to confine, and, wafting it partially sometimes hoping that be might again see her, 

aside, disclosed to him a countenance more however distantly, in a balcony of the house, 

touchingly beautiful than he had dared to whei^ the silk awning seemed to invite the 

image. Her features were of the Grecian breeze from the sea. He lingered hour after 

outline, and though they expressed the tran- hour, stretched beneath the umbrageous pines 

quillity of an elegant mind, her dark blue e^es that waved over the shore, or traversin;^. re- 

sparkled with intelligence. She was assist mg gardless of the heat, the bsise of the clifTs that 
her companionso anxiously as not immediately crowned it, recalling to his fancy the encliaiit« 

to observe the admiration she had inspired ; ment of her smile, and seeming still to listen 
but the moment her eyes met those of Vi- to the sweetness of her accents, 
valdi, she became conscious of the effect and In the evening he returned to his father's 

hastily drew her veil. palace at Naples, thoughtful yet pleased. 

The old lady was not materially hurt by anxious yet happy, dwelling with delightful 

her fall, but as she walked with difficulty, hope on the remembrance of the thanks he 

Vivaldi seized the opportunity thus offer^ had received from EHcna, yet not daring to 

and insisted that she should accept his arm. form any plan as to his futiu-e conduct. He 

She refused this with many acknowledgements, returned time enough to attend his mother in 

but he pressed the offer so repeatedly and her evening ride on the Corso, where, in every 

respectfully that at length she accepted it, gay carriage that passed, he hoped to see the 

and they walked towards her residence to- object of his constant thought, but she did 

gether. not appear. His mother, the Marchesa di 

On the way thither he attempted to converse Vivaldi, observed his anxiety and imusual 

with EUena. but her replies were concise, and he silence, and asked him some questions, which 

arrived at the end of the walk while he was yet she meant should lead to an explanation of 

considering what he could say that might in- the change in his manners ; but his replies 

terest and withdraw her from thisseverereserve. only excited a stronger ctuiosity. and, though 

From the style of their residence he imagined she forbore to press her ioquiries. it was. pro- 

that they were persons of honourable but mo- bably, that she might employ a more artful 

derate independence. The house was small, means of renewing them, 
but exhibited an air of comfort and even of Vincentio di Vivaldi was the only son of 

taste. It stood on an eminence, surrounded the Marchese di Vivaldi, a nobleman of one 

by a garden and vineyards, which commanded of the most ancient families of the kin^^dom of 

the City and Bay of Naples, an ever-moving Naples, a favourite possessing an uncommon 

picture, and was canopied by a thick grove of share of influence at Court ; a man still 

pines and majestic date trees, and, though the higher in power than in rank. His pride of 

little portico and colonnade in front were of birth was equal to either, but it was mingled 

common marble, the style of architecture was with the justifiable pride of a principled mind ; 

elegant. While they afforded a shelter from it governed his conduct in morals as well as 

the sun, they admitted the cooling breezes in the jealousy of ceremonial distinctions, and 

that rose from the bay below, and a prospect elevated his practice as well as his claims, 

of the whole scope of its enchanting shores. His pride was at once his vice and his virtue, 

Vivaldi stopped at the litde gate which led his safeguard and his weakness, 

into the garden, where the elder lady repeated The mother of Vivaldi, descended from a 

her acknowledgments for his care, but did not family as ancient as that of his father, v/as 

invite him to enter ; and he, trembling with equally jealous of her importance ; but her 

anxiety and sinking with disappointment, re- pride was that of birth and distinction, with- 

mained for £ moment gazing upon EUena, out extending to morals. She was of violent • 

unable to take leave, yet irresolute what to say passions, haughty, vindictive, yet crafty and 

that might prolong the interview, till the old deceitful ; patient in stratagem, and inde- 

lady again bade him good-day. He then fatigable in pursuit of vengeance on the un- 

summoned courage enough to request he happy objects who provoked her r' sentment. 

might be allowed to inquire after her health, She loved her son rather as being the last of 

and, having obtained a reluctant permission, two illustrious houses who was to reunite and 

his eyes bade adieu to EUena, who, as they support the honour of both, than with the 

were parting, ventured to thank him for the fondness of a mother. 

care he had taken of her aunt. The sound of Vincentio inherited much of the character 
hervoice and this acknowledgment of obi iga- of his father, and very little of that of his 
tion made him less wilHn^ to go than before, mother. His pride was as noble and generous 
but at length he tore himself away. The as that of the Marche-e ; but he had some- 
beauty of her countenance haunting his what of the fiery passi' >ns of the Marchesa, 
imagination, and the touching accents of her without any of her craft, her duplicity, or 
voice still vibrating on his heart, he descended vindictive thirst of revenge. Frauk in his 
to the shore below her residence, pleasing him- temper, ingenuous in his sentiments, quickly/ 
self with the consciousness of being near her offended, but easUy appcas^^i \ vcrvV^Xfc^ Xs^ 
though he could no longer behold her ; and any appearance ot d.\scts^«^Vt>av)X tsi^\fi^>i 



THE ITAUAM, 



a concession, a high sense of honoitf tendered 
him no mare jealous of offence than a deli- 
cate humanity made him ready for recon- 
ciliation, and anxious to spare the feeliugs of 
others. 

On the day following that on which he had 
seen Ellena, he returned to the Villa Altieri, 
to use the permission granted him of inquir- 
ing after the health of Signora Bianchi. 
The expectation of seeing Ellena agitated 
him with impatient joy and trembling hope, 
which still increased as he approached her 
residence, till, having reached the garden- 
gate, he was obliged to rest for a few moments 
to recover breath and composure. 

Having announced himself to an old female 
servant, who came to the gate, he was soon 
after admitted to a small vestibule, where he 
found Bianchi winding balls of silk, and alone ; 
though from the position of a chair, which 
stood near a frame for embroidery, he judged 
that Ellena had but just quitted the apartment, 
Signora Bianchi received him with a reserved 
pMiteness, and seemed very cautious in her 
replies to his inquiries after her niece, who 
he hoped, every moment, would appear. He 
lengthened his visit till there was no longer 
an excuse for doing so ; till he had exhausted 
every topic of conversation, and till the 
silence of Bianchi seemed to hint that his 
departure was expected. With a hecu-t sad- 
dened by disappointment, and having ob- 
tained only a reluctant permission to inquire 
after the health of that lady on some future 
day, he then took leave. 

On his way through the garden he often 
paused to look back upon the house, hoping 
to obtain a glimpse of Ellena at a lattice ; and 
threw a glance around him, almost expect- 
ing to see her seated beneath the shade of the 
luxuriant plantains ; but his search was 
everywhere vain, and he quitted the place with 
the slow and heavy step of despondency. 

The day was employed in endeavours to 
obtain intelligence concerning the family of 
Ellena, but of this he procured little that was 
'satisfactory. He was told that she was an 
orphan, living tmder the care of her aunt, 
Signora Bianchi ; that her family, which had 
never been illustrious, was decayed in fortune, 
and that her only dependence was upon this 
aunt. But he was ignorant of what was very 
true, though very secret, that she assisted to 
support this aged relative, whose sole property 
was the small estate on which they lived, and 
that she passed whole days in embroidering 
silks, which were disposed of to the nuns of 
a neighbouring convent, who sold them to the 
Neapolitan ladies that visited their grate, at a 
very high advantage. He little thought that 
a beautiful robe which he had often seen his 
mother wear, was worked by Ellena ; nor that 
some copies from the antique, which orna- 
mented a cabinet of the Vivaldi palace, were 
drawn by her hand. If he had known these 



circumstances, they would only have served 
to increase the tenderness whicm, ance they 
were proofs of a disparity of fortune that 
would certainly render his family repugnant 
to a connection with hers, it would have been 
prudent to overcome. 

Ellena could have endured poverty, but not 
contempt : and it was to protect herself from 
this effect of the narrow prejudices of the 
world around her, that she had so cautiously 
concealed from it a knowledge of the industry 
which did honour to her character. She was 
not ashamed of poverty, or of the industry 
which overcame it. but her spirit shrunk from 
the senseless smile and humiliating conde- 
scension which prosperity sometimes gives to 
indigence. Her mmd was not yet strong 
enough, or her views sufficiently enlarged, to 
teach her a contempt of the sneer of vicious 
folly, and to glonr m the dignity of virtuous 
independence. Ellena was roe sole support 
of her aunt's declining years ; was patient ^o 
her infirmities, and consoling to her siUfer- 
ings ; and repaid the fondness of a mother 
with the affection of a daughter. Her mother 
she had never known, having lost her while 
she was an infant, and from that period 
Bianchi had practised the kindness of one 
towards her. 

Thus, innocent and happy in the silent per- 
formance of her duties and in the veil of 
retirement, lived Ellena Rosalba, when ' she 
first saw Vincentio di "N^valdi. He was not 
of a figure to pass unobserved when seen, and 
Ellena had been struck by the spirit and 
dignity of his air, and by his coimtenance, so 
frank, noble, and full of that kind of ex- 
pression which announcf*'^ the energies of 
the soul. But she was cautious of admitting 
a sentiment more tender than admiration, 
and endeavoured to dismiss his image from 
her mind, and, by engaging in her usual 
occupations, to recover Uie state of tran- 
quillity which his appearance had somewhat 
interrupted. 

Vivaldi, meanwhile, restless from disappoint- 
ment, and impatient from anxiety, having 
passed the greater part of the day in inquiries 
which repaid him only with doubt and 
apprehension, determinexi to return to ViUa 
^tieri when evening should conceal his steps, 
consoled by the certainty of being near the 
object of his thoughts, and hoping that 
chance might favour him once more with a 
view, however transient,, of Ellena. 

The Marchesa Vivaldi held an assembly 
this evening, and a suspicion concerning the 
impatience he betrayed, induced her to detain 
him about her person to a late hour, engaging 
him to select the music for her orchestra, and 
to superintend the performance of a new 
piece, the work of a composer whom she had 
brought into fashion. Her assemblies were 
among the most brilliant and crowded in 
Naples, and the nobility who wore to be at 



.v « 



THB ITALIAN. 7 

the palace this evening were dMded into two and the groans of the far-off mountain— till 

parties as to the merits of the musical genius a chaunting of deep voices swelled from a 

whom she patronised and those of another distance. The solemn character of the strain 

candidate for fame. The performance of the engaged his attention ; he perceived that it 

evening, it was expected, would finally decide was a requiem, and he endeavoured to dis- 

the victory. This, therefore, was a night of cover from what quarter it came. It advanced 

greatimportance and anxiety to the Marchesa, though distantly, and then passed away on 

for she was as jealotis of the reputation of the air. The circumstance struck him ; he 

her favourite composer as of her own, and knew it was usual in some parts of Jtalv to 

the welfare of her son did but slightly divide chaunt this strain over the bed of the dying ; 

her cares. but here the mourners seemed to walk the 

The moment he could depart unobserved earth, or the air. He was not doubtful as to 

be quitted the assembly, and muffling himself the strain itself ; once before he had heard it, 

in his doak, hastened to Villa Altieri, which and attended with drcumstanas which made 

lay at a short distance to the west of the city, it impossible that he should ever forget it. 

He reached it unobserved, and, breathless As he now listened to the choral voices soft- 

with impatience, traversed the boundary of ening into distance, a few pathetic notes 

the garden ; where, fiee from ceremonial brought full upon his remembrance the divine 

restraint, and near the object of his affection, melody he had heard Eliena utter in the 

he experienced for the few first moments a church of San Lorenzo. Overcome by the 

joy as exquisite as her presence could have recollection, he started away, and, wandering 

inspired. But this delight faded with its over the garden, reached another side of the 

novelty, and in a short time he felt as forlorn villa, where he soon heard the voice of Eliena 

as if he was separated for ever from Eliena, herself, performing the midnight hymn to the 

in whose presence he but lately almost Virgin, and accompanied by a lute, which 

believed himself. she touched with most affecting and delicate 

The night was far advanced, and, no light expression. He stood for a moment en« 

appearing from the house, he concluded the tranced, and scarcely daring to breathe, lest 

inhabitants had retired to rest, and all hope he should lose any note of that meek and 

of seeing her vanished from his mind. Still, holy strain, which seemed to flow from a 

however, it was sweet to be near her, and he devotion almost saintly. Then looking round 

anxiously sought to gain admittance to the to discover the object of his admiration, a 

gardens, that he might approach the window light issuing from among the bowery foliage 

where it was possible she reposed. The of a clematis led him to a lattice, and showed 

boundary, formed of trees and thick shrubs, him Eliena. The lattice had been thrown 

was not difficult to be passed, and be found open to admit the cool air, and he had a full 

himself once more in the portico of the view.of her and the apartment. She was rising 

villa. from a small altar where she had concluded 

It was nearly midnight, and the stillness the service ; the glow of devotion was still 

that reigned was rather soothed than inter- upon her countenance as she raised her eyes, 

nipted by the gentle dashing of the waters of and with a rapt earnestness fixed them on 

the ba^ be^ow, and by the hollow murmurs of the heavens. She still held the lute, but no 

Vesuvius, which threw up at intervals its longer awakened it, and seemed lost for a 

sudden flame on the horizon, and then lefc it moment to every surrounding object Her 

to darkness. The solemnity of the scene fine hair was negligently bound up in a silU 

accorded with the temper of his mind, and net, and some tresses that had' escaped i\ 

he listened In deep attention for the returning played on her neck and round her beautiful 

sounds, whidi broke upon the ear like distant countenance, which now was not even partially 

thunder muttering imperfecdy from the concealed by a veil. The light drapery of 

clouds. The pauses of sflence that succeeded her dress, her whole figure, air, and attitude, 

each groan of the mountain, when expecta- were such as might have been copied for a 

tion listened for the rising. sound, affected the Grecian nymph. 

imagination of Vivaldi at this time with par- Vivaldi was perplexed and agitated between 

ticular awe ; and wrapt in thought, he con- the wish of seizing an opportunity, which 

tinned to gaze upon the sublime and shadowy might never again occur, of pleading his love, 

outline of the shores, and on the sea just dis- and the fear of offending by intruding upon 

cemed beneath the twilight of a cloudless her retirement at so sacred an hour. While 

sky. Along its grey surface many vessels he thus hesitated she placed herself in a chair, 

were pursuing their silent course, guided over and, touching her lute in sweet symphony, 

the deep waters only by the polar star, which presently accompanied it with her voice in a 

burned with steady lustre. The air was calm, little air beautiful for its simplicity and 

and rose. from the bay with most balmy and pathos. When she had concluded, he heard 

refreshing coolness ; it scarcely stirred the her sigh, and then, with a sweetness peculiax 

heads of the broad pines that overspread the to her accent, proaounca ViSs tvaitit. X^mxvw^l 

yrilla ; and bore no sounds but of t^e waves the trembWng anxXeV^ m'CcL >N\AOcw\ife\^'vKw^ 



8 



THE ITALIAN, 



to what might follow this mention of his name 
he disturbed the clematis that surrounded the 
lattice, and she turned her eyes towards the 
window : but Vivaldi was entirely concealed 
by tile foliage. She, however, rose to close 
the lattice, when, as she approached it, Viv- 
aldi, unable any longer to command himself, 
appeared before her. She stood fixed for an 
instant, while her countenance changed to an 
ashy paleness ; and then, with trembling 
haste clo'.ing the lattice, quitted the apart- 
ment. Vivaldi felt as if all his hopes had 
vanished with her. 

After lingering in the garden for some time 
without perceiving a li^ht in any other part 
of the building, or hearmg a sound proceed 
from it, he took his melancholy way to 
Naples. He now began to ask himself some 
questions which he ought to have urged 
before, and to inquire wherefore he sought 
the dangerous pleasure of seeing Ellena, 
since her family was of such a condition as 
rendered the consent of his parents to a 
marriage with her unattainable. 

He was lost in reverie on this subject, 
sometimes half resolved to seek her no more, 
:ind then shrinking from a conduct which 
teemed to strike him with the force of despair, 
when, as he emerged from the dark arch of a 
ruin that extended over the road, his steps 
were crossed by a person in the habit of a 
monk whose face was shrouded by his cowl 
still more than by the twilight. The stranger, 
addressitig him by his name, said, " Signor, 
your steps are watched ; beware how you 
revisit Altieri ! " Having uttered this he 
disappeared, before Vivaldi could return the 
SA'ord he had half drawn into the scabbard, 
or demand an explanation of the words he 
h^d heard. He called loudly and repeat- 
edly, conjuring the unknown person to 
appear, and lingered near the spot for a con- 
siderable time; but the vision came no more. 

Vivaldi arrived at home \vith a mind occu- 
pied by this incident, and tormented by the 
jealousy to which it gave rise ; for, after in- 
dulging various conjectures, he concluded 
with believing the notice, of wliich he had 
been warned, to be that of a rival, and that 
the danger which menaced him was from 
the poniard of jealousy. This belief dis- 
covered to him at once the extent of his 
passion, and of the imprudence which had 
thus readily admitted it ; yet so £ar was this 
new conviction from restraining bis impetu- 
osity, that, stung with a torture more exquisite 
than he had ever known, he resolved at every 
event to declare his love, and sue for the 
hand of Ellena. Unhappy young man, he 
knew not the fatal error into which pas£>ion 
was precipitating him ! 

On his arrival at the Vivaldi palace he 
learned that the Marchesa had observed his 
absence, had repeatedly inquired for him, 
and had given orders that the time of his 



return should be mentioned to her. She had, 
however, retired to rest ; but the Marchese, 
who had attended the King on an excursion 
to one of the royal villas on the bay, did not 
return home till after Vincentio, when he met 
his son with looks of unusual displeasure, 
but avoided saying anything which either 
explained or alluded to the subject of it ; and 
after a short conversation they separated. 

Vivaldi shut himself in his apartment to 
deliberate, if that may deserve the name of 
deliberation in which a conflict of passions 
rather than an exertion of judgment prevailed. 
For several hours he traversed his suite of 
rooms, alternately tortured by the remem- 
brance of Ellena, fired with jealousy, and 
alarmed for the consequence of the imprudent 
step which he was about to take. He knew 
the temper of his father, and some traits of 
the character of his mother, sufficiently to 
fear that their displeasure would be irrecon- 
cilable concerning the marriage he meditated ; 
yet, when he considered that he was their 
only son, he was inclined to admit a hope of 
forgiveness, notwithstanding the weight which 
the circumstance must add to their disai> 
pointment. These reflections were frequently 
interrupted by fears lest Ellena had already 
disposed of her affections to this imaginary 
rival. He was, however, somewhat consoled 
by remembering the sigh she had uttered, 
and the tenderness with which she had im- 
mediately pronounced his name. Yet, even if 
she were not averse to his suit, how could he 
solicit her hand and hope it would be given 
him when he should declare that this must be 
in secret ? He scarcely dared to believe that 
she would condescend to enter a family who 
were unwilling to receive her; and again 
despondency overcame him. 

The morning found him as distracted as 
the night had left him. His determination, 
however, was fixed ; and this was to sacrifice 
what he now considered as a delusive pride 
of birth to a choice which he believed would 
ensure the happiness of his life. But before 
he ventured to declare himself to Ellena, it 
appeared necessary to ascertain whether he 
held an interest in her heart, or whether she 
had devoted it to the rival of his love, and 
who this rival really was. It was so much 
easier to wish for such information than to 
obtain it. that, after forming a thousand pro- 
jects, either the delicacy of his respect for 
Ellena, or his fear of offending her, or ao 
apprehension of discovery from his i^ily 
before he bad secured an interest in her 
affections, constantly opposed his views of an 
inquiry. 

In tills difficulty he opened his heart to a 
friend who had long possessed his confidence, 
and .whose advice he solicited with somewhat 
more anxiety and sincerity than is usual on 
such occasions. It was not a sanction of his 
own opinion that he required, but the ioi 



THE ITALIAS, 



partial judgment of another mind. Bonarmo, 
however little he might be qualified for the 
office of an adviser, did not scruple to give 
his advice. As a means of judging wheUier 
Ellena was disposed to favour Vivaldi's ad- 
dresses, he proposed that, according to the 
custom of the country, a serenade should be 
given. He maintained that if she was not 
disinclined towards him. some sign of appro- 
bation would appear ; and if otherwise, that 
she would remain silent and invisible. 
Vivaldi objected to this coarse and inade- 
quate mode of expressing a love so sacred 
as his ; and he had too lofty an opinion of 
Ellena's mind and delicacy to believe that the 
trifling homage of a serenade would either 
flatter her self-love or interest her in his 
favour ; nor, if it did. could he venture to 
believe that she would display any sign of 
approbation. 

His friend laughed at his scruples and at 
his opinion of what he called such romantic 
delicacy, that his ignorance of the world was 
his only excuse for having cherished them. 
But Vivaldi interrupted this raillery, and would 
neither suffer him for a moment to speak thus 
of Ellena or to call such delicacy romantic. 
Bonarmo, however, still urged the serenade 
as at least a possible means of discovering 
her disposition towards him before he made a 
formal avowal of his suit ; and Vivaldi, per- 
plexed and distracted with apprehension and 
impatience to terminate his present slate of 
suspense, was at length so far overcome, by 
his own difficulties rather than by his friend's 
persuasion, that he consented to make ihe 
adventure of a serenade on the approaching 
night. This was adopted rather as a refuge 
from despondency than with a hope of 
success, for he still believed that Ellena 
would not givie any hint which might termi- 
nate his uncertainty. 

Beneath their cloaks, when the day had 
closed, they carried musical instruments, and 
muffling up their faces so that they could not 
be known, they proceeded in thoughtful 
silence on the way to Villa Aliierl. Already 
they had passed the arch in which Vivaldi was 
stopped by the stranger on the preceding 
night, when he heard a sudden sound near 
him, and raising his head from his cloak, he 
perceived the &ime figure I Before he had 
time fur exclamation the stranger crossed 
him again. "Go not to Villa Altieri," said 
he, in a solemn voice, " lest you meet the fate 
you ought to dread." 

•'What fate?" demanded Vivaldi, stepping 
back. ** Speak, I conjure you 1 " 

But the monk was gone, and the darkness 
of the hour baffled ot^ervation as to the way 
of his departure. 

" Dio mi guardU*' exclaimed Bonarmo ; 
" this is almost beyond belief. But let us 
return to Naples ; this second warning ought 
to be obeyed." 



"It is nlmost be>'ond endurance," ex- 
claimed Vivaldi. '* Which way did he 
pass?" 

" He glided by me," replied Bonarmo, 
' ' and he was gone before I could cross 
him I" 

"I will tempt the worst at once," faid 
Vivaldi. " It I have a rival, it is best to 
meet him. Let us go on." 

Bonarmo remonstrated, and represented 
the serious danger that threatened from ^o 
rash a proceeding. "It is evident that you 
have a rival," sad he, "and your courp^j 
cannot avail you against hired bravos." ^ 

Vivaldi's heart swelled at the mention of a 
rival. " If vou think it dangerous to proceed, 
I wi'l go alone," he rejoined. 

Hurt by this reproof, Bonarmo accom- 
panied his friend in silence, and they reached 
without interruption the boundary of the 
villa. Vivaldi led to the place by which he 
had entered en the preceding night, and 
they passed unmolested into the garden. 

" Where are these terrible bravos of whom 
you warned me ?" said Vivaldi, with taunting 
exultation. 

"Speak cautiously." replied his friend; 
"we may, even now, be within their reach." 

" They also may be within ours," obseived 
Vivaldi. 

At length these adventurous friends came 
to the orangery, which was near the house, 
when, tired by the ascent, they rested to re- 
cover breath and to prepare their instruments 
for the serenade. The night was still, and 
they now heard for the first time murmurs as 
of a distant multitude, and then the sudden 
splendour of fireworks broke upon the sky. 
These arose from a villa on the western 
margin of the bay, and were given in honour 
of the birth of one of the royal princes. 
They soared to an immense height, and, as 
their lustre broke silently upon the night, it 
lightened on the thousand upturned fices of 
the gazing crowd, illumined the waters of the 
bay, with al the shipping and every little 
boat that skimmed its surface, and showed 
distinctly the whole sweep of its rising shores, 
the statelv city of Naples on the strand below, 
and, spreading far among the hills, its terraced 
roofs crowded with spectators, and the Corso, 
tumultuous with carriages and blazing with 
torches. 

While Bonarmo surveyed this magnificent 
scene, Vivaldi turned his eyes to the residence 
of Elltrna, part of which looked out from 
among the trees, with a hope that the spectacle 
would draw her to a balcony ; but she did not 
appear, nor was there any light that migl^t 
indicate her approach. 

While they still rested on the turf of the 
orangery they heard a sudden rustling of the 
leaves as if the branches were disturbed by 
some person who endeavoured to make his 
way between them, wheivVv?^^\ ^^\tv^^^'^ 



lO 



THE ITALIAN. 



who passed. No answer was returned, and 
a long silence followed. 

"We are observed," said Bonarmo at 
length, " and are even now, perhaps, almost 
beneath the poniard of the assassin. Let us 
be gone. " 

** Oh, that my heart were as secure from 
the darts of love, the assassin of my peace," 
exclaimed Vivaldi, " as yours is from those 
of bravos. My friend, you have little to 
interest you, since your thoughts have so 
much leisure for apprehension." 

" My fear is that of prudence, not of weak- 
ness," retorted Bonarmo, with acrimony. 
**You will find, perhaps, that I have none 
when you most wish me to possess it." 

" I understand you." replied Vivaldi ; "let 
us finish this business and you shall receive 
reparation, since you believe yourself injured. 
I am as anxious to repair an offence as jealous 
of receiving one." 

"Yes," replied Bonarmo, "you would re- 
pair the injury you have done your friend with 
his blood." 

" Oil, never ! never ! " said Vivaldi, falling 
on his neck. "Forgive my hasty violence ! 
allow for the distraction of my mind ! " 

Bonarmo returned the embrace. "It is 
enough," said he ; *'no more, no more, I hold 
again my friend to my heart." 

While this conversation passed they had 
quitted the orangery and reached the walls 
of the villa, where they took their station under 
a balcony that overhung the lattice through 
which Vivaldi had seen Ellena on the preced- 
ing night. They tuned their instruments and 
opened the serenade with a duet. 

Vivaldi's voice was a fine tenor, and the 
same susceptibility which made him passion- 
ately fond of music, taught him to modulate 
its cadence with exquisite delicacy and to 
give his emphasis with the most simple and 

gathetic expression. His soul seemed to 
reathe in the sounds— so tender, so imploring, 
yet so energetic. On this night enthusiasm 
inspired him \vith the highest eloquence, per- 
haps, which music is capable of attaining. 
What might be its effect on Ellena he had no 
means of judging, for she did not appear 
either at the balcony or the lattice, nor give 
any hint of applause. No sounds stole on 
the stillness of the night except those of the 
serenade, nor did any light from within the 
villa brejik upon the obscurity without : once, 
indeed, in a pause of the instruments, Bon- 
armo fancied he distinguished voices near 
him as of persons who feared to be heard, 
and l^e listened attentively, but without 
ascertaining the truth. Sometimes they 
seemed to sound heavily in his ear, and then 
a death-like silence prevailed. Vivaldi af- 
firmed the sound to be nothing more than the 
confused murmur of the distant multitude on 
the shore, but Bonarmo was not thus easily 
convinced. 



* The musicians, unsuccessful in their first 
endeavour to attract attention, removed to 
the opposite side of the building and placed 
themselves in front of the portico, but with 
as little success ; and after having exercised 
their powers of harmony and of patience for 
above an hour, they resigned all further effort 
to win upon the obdurate Ellena. VivaMi, 
notwithstanding the feebleness of his firsts, 
hope of seeing her, now suffered an agony of 
disappointment ; and Bonarmo, alarmed for 
the consequence of his despair, was as anxious 
to persuade him that he had no rival as ttn 
had lately been pertinacious in affirming that 
he had one. 

At length they left the gardens, Vivaldi 
protesting that he would not rest till he had 
discovered the stranger who so wantonly de- 
stroyed his peace and had compelled him to 
explain his ambiguous warnings ; and Bon- 
armo remonstrating on the imprudence and 
difficulty of the search, and representing that 
such conduct would probably be the means 
of spreading a report of his attachment where 
most he dreaded it should be known. 

Vivaldi refused to yield to remonstrance or 
considerations of any kind. "We shall see," 
said he, " whether this demon in the garb of 
a monk will haunt me again at the ac- 
customed place ; if he does, he shall not 
escape my grasp, and if he does not, I will 
watch as vigilantly for his return as he seems 
to have done for mine. I will lurk in the 
shade of the ruin and wait for him, though it 
be tiU death." 

Bonarmo was particularly struck by the 
vehemence with which he pronounced the 
last words, but he no longer opposed his pur- 
pose, and only bade him consider whether he 
was well armed. •* For, " he added, "you may 
have need of arms there, though you had no 
use for them at Altieri. Remember that the 
stranger told you that your steps were 
watched. " 

" I have my sword," replied Vivaldi, *'and 
the dagger which I usually wear. But I 
ought to inquire, what are your weapons of 
defence?" 

" Hush I " said Bonarmo, as they turned 
the foot of a rock that overhung the rT-ad, 
" we are approaching the spot, yonder is the 
arch ! " It appeared duskily in the perspective, 
suspended between two cliffs, where the road 
wound from sight ; on one of which were 
the ruins of the Roman fort it belonged to, 
and on the other, shadowing pines and 
thickets of oalc that tufted the rock to its 
base. 

They proceeded in silence, treading lightly, 
and often throwing asuspicio'us glance around, 
expecting every instant that the monk would 
steal out upon them from some recess of the 
cliffs. But they passed on unmolested to the 
archway. " We are here before him, how- 
ever," said Vivaldi, as they entered the dark- 



THB ITALIAN. it 

nett. '*Sp«ak low, my friend," said Bon- seemed to anticipate the receptioa which 

amo { " others besides ourselves may be awaited you, and to know a danger which 

shrouded in this obscurity. I like not the hitherto you have happily escaped, 

pkioe.'- "Yes, he anticipated too wdl that recep- 

" Who but ourselves would choose so dis- tion," said Vivaldi, losing his prudence m 

nal a retreat ?" whisp^wl Vivaldi, "unless passionate exclamation ; "and he is himself 

indeed it were banditti ; the savageness of perhaps the rival whom he has taught me to 

the spot would in truth suit their humour, suspect. He has assumed a disguiA only the 

and it suits well also with my own." more effectually to impose upon my cnedu- 

" It would suit their purpcoe too, as well as lity and to deter me from addressing EUena. 

their humour," obsorved Bonarmo. " Let And shall I tamely lie in wait for his approach ? 

us remove from this deep shade into the more Shall I lurk like a guilty assassin for this rival ? " 

open road, where we can as closely observe "For Heaven's ^ike I " said Bonarmo, 

who passes." "moderate these transports ; consider where 

Vinddi objected that in the road they you are. This surmise of yours is in the 

might themselves be observed. "And if we higha*^ degree improbable." 

are seen by my unknown tormentor our design He gave his reasons for thinking so, and 

is defeated, for he comes upon us suddenly these convinced Vivaldi, who was prevailed 

or not at all, lest we should be prepared to upon to be once more patient, 

detain him." They had remained watt hful and still for a 

Vivaldi, as he said this, took his station considerable time, when Bonarmo saw a per- 

within the thickest gloom of the arch, which son approach the end of the archway nearest 

was of considerabk depth, and near a flieht to Altieri. He heard no step, but he perceived 

of steps that was cut in the rock, and ascended a diadowy figure station itself at the entrance 

to the fortress. His friend stepped close to of the arch, where the twilight of this brilliant 

his side. After a pause of silence, during climate was for a few paces admitted. Viv- 

which BOnarmo was meditating and Vivaldi aldi's eyes were fixed on the road leading 

was impatientlv watching, " Do you really towards Naples, and he therefore did notper- 

believe," said tne former, "that any effort to ceive the object of Bonarmo's attention, who, 

detain him would be effectual. He glided fearful of his friend's precipitancy, forbore to 

past me with a strange facility ; it was stuely point out immediately what he observed, 

more than human 1 " judging it more prudent to watch the motions 

" What is it you mean ?" inquired Vivaldi, of this unknown person, that he might ascer- 

"Why, I mean that I could be supersti- tain whether it really were the monk. The size 

tious. This place perhaps infects my mind of the figure and the dark drapery in which 

with congenial gloom, for I find that at this it seemed wrapped induced him at length 

moment there is scarcely a superstition too to believe that this was the expected stranger, 

dark for my credulity." and he seized Vivaldi's arm to direct his at- 

^^valdi smiled. '*And you must allow," tention to him, when the form,gliding forward, 
added Bonarmo, " that he has appeared under disappeared in the gloom of the arch, tmt 
circumstances somewhat extraordinary. How not before Vivaldi had understood the occa- 
should he know your name, by which you say sion of his friend's gesture and significant 
he addressed you at the firat meeting? How silence. They heard no footstep pass them, 
should he know from whence you came, or and being convinced that this person, what- 
whether you designed to return > By what ever he was, had not left the archway, they 
magic could he become acquainted with your kept their station in watchful stfllness. Pre- 
plans?" sently they heard a rustling, as of garments, 

" Nor am I certain that he is acquainted near them, and Vivaldi, unable longer to com- 
with them," observed Vivaldi ; '* but if he is, mand his impatience, started from his conceal- 
there was no necessity for superhuman means ment, and, with arms extended to prevent any- 
to obtain such knowledge." one from escaping, demanded who was there. 

*' The result of this evening surely ought The sound ceased, and no reply was made. 
to convince you that he is acquainted with Bonarmo drew his sword, protesting he would 
your designs." said Bonarmo. "Do you stab the air till he found the person who 
believe it possible that EUena could have lurked there ; but that if the latter would dis- 
hed insensible to your attentions if her heart cover himself he should receive no injury. 
had not been pre-engaged, and that she would This assurance Vivaldi confirmed by hs pro- 
have forborne to show herself at a lattice? " mise. Still no answer was returned ; but as 
"You do not know Ellena," replied Viv- they listened for a voice they thought some- 
aldi, "and therefore I once more pardon thing passed them, and the avenue was not 
you the question. Yet had she been disposed narrow enough to have prevented such a 
to accept my addresses, surely some sign of circumstance. Vivaldi rushed forward, but 
approbation—-" He checked himself. did not perceive any person issue from the 

"IThe stranger warned you not to go to arch into the highway, where iIa ^Vcnxki^^ 

Vi]]» Altieri," resumed Booarmo ; "he twilight mu3l l^ave Oi\^N^«^\)ccni. 



13 



THE ITALIAN, 



'•Somebody certainly passed, "^ whispered 
Bonarmo, "and I think I hear a sound 
from yonder steps that lead to the fortress." 

"Let us follow," cried Vivaldi, and be 
began to asrend. 

' Stop, for Heaven's sake, stop !" said 
Bonarmo; '* consider what you are about. 
Do not brave the utter darkness of these 
ruins ; do not pursue the assassin to his den." 

"It is the monk himself 1" exclaimed 
Vivaldi, still ascending ; " he shall not escape 
me." 

Bonarmo paused a moment at the foot of 
the steps, and his friend disappeared. He 
hesitated what to do, till, ashamed of suffering 
him to encounter danger alone, he sprang to 
the flight, and, not without difficulty, sur- 
mounted the rugged steps. 

Having reached the summit of the rock, 
he found himself on a terrace that ran along 
the top of the archway and had once been for- 
tified : this, crossing the road, commanded the 
defile each way. Some remains of massy 
walls, that still exhibited loops for archers, 
were all that now hinted of its former use. It 
led to a watch-tower, almost concealed in 
thick pines, that crowned the opposite cliff, 
and had thus served not only for a strong 
battery over the road, but, connecting the 
opposite sides of the defile, had formed a line 
of communication between the fort and this 
outpost 

Bonarmo looked round in vain for his friend, 
and the echoes of his own voice only, among 
the rocks, repHed to his repeated calls. After 
some hesitation whether to enter the walls of 
the main building, or to cross to the watch- 
tower, he determined on the former, and 
entered a rugged area, the walls of which, 
following the declivities of the precipice, 
could scarcely now be traced The citadel, 
a roimd tower of majestic strength, with some 
Roman arches scattered near, was all that re- 
mained of this once important fortress ; ex- 
cept, indeed, a mass of ruins near the edge 
of the cliff, the construction of which made 
it difficult to guess for what purpose it had 
been designed. 

Bonarmo entered the immense walls of the 
citadel, but the utter darkness within checked 
his progress, and contenting himself with 
calling loudly on Vivaldi, he returned to the 
open air. 

As he approached the mass of ruin, whose 
singular form had interested his curiosity, he 
thought he distinguished the low accents of a 
human voice, and while he listened in anxiety, 
a person rushed forth from a doorway of the 
ruin, carrying a drawn sword. It was Vivaldi 
himself. Bi .narmo sprang to meet him ; he 
was pale and breathless, and some moments 
elapsed before he could speak, or appeared 
to hear the repeated inquiries of his friend. 

" Let us go," said Vivaldi ; "let us leave 
this place ! " 



'* Most willingly," replied Bonarmo ; " but 
where have you been, and who have you seen, 
that you are thus afifected?" . 

" Ask me no more questions ; let us gOi" 
repeated Vivaldi. 

They descended the rock together, and 
when, havmg reached the archway, Bonarmo 
inquired, haS" sportively, whether they should 
remain any longer on the watch, his friend 
answered, "No! "with an emphasis that 
startled him. They passed hastily on the way 
to Naples, Bonarmo repeating inquiries whidi 
Vivaldi seemed reluctant to satisfy, and won- 
dering no less at the cause of this sudden 
reserve than anxious to know whom he had 
seen. 

" It was the monk, then," said Bonarmo ; 
*' you secured him at last ? " 

"I know not what to think," replied 
Vivaldi. " I am more perplexed than ever." 

" He escaped you, then ? " 

"We will speak of this in future," said 
Vivaldi ; ' ' but be it as it may, the business 
rests not here. I will return in the night of 
to-morrow with a torch ; dare you venture 
yourself with me? " 

" I know not," replied Bonarmo, "whether 
I ought to do so, since I am not informed for 
what purpose." 

"I will not press you to go," said Vivaldi ; 
"my purpose is already known to you." 

"Have you really failed to discover the 
stranger ? — have you still doubts concerning 
the person you pursued ? " 

"I have doubts which to-morrow night will, 
I hope, dissipate." 

" This is very strange ! " said Bonarmo. 
"It was but now that I witnessed the horror 
with which you left the fortress of Paluzzi, 
and already you speak of returning to it ! 
And why at night? — why not in the day, when 
less danger would beset you ? " 

'* I know not as to that," replied Vivaldi. 
"You are to observe that daylight never 
pierces within the recess to which I pene- 
trated : we must search the place with torches 
at whatsoever hour we would examine it." 

"Since this is necessary," said Bonarmo, 
" how happens it that you found your way in 
total darkness ? " 

' ' I was too much engaged to know bow ; 
I was led on, as by an invisible band." 

"We must, notwithstanding," observed 
Bonarmo, "go in daytime, if not by day- 
light, provided I accompany you. It would 
be little less than insanity to go twice to a 
place which is probably infested with robbers, 
and at their own hour of midnight." 

" I shall watch again in the accustomed 
place," replied Vivaldi, " before I use my last 
resource, and this cannot be done during the 
day. Besides, it is necessary that I should go 
at a particular hour — the hour when the monk 
has usually appeared." 

" He did escape you, then,'' 8ai4 jBonanoo. 



THE ITALIAN, 



«3 



" and you are still ienorant concerning who 
he is?* 

Vivaldi rejohied only with an inouiry 
whether his friend would acconipany him, 
"If not," he added, ••! must hope to find 
another comi^nion." 

Bonarmo said that he must consider of the 
proposal, and wouM acquaint him with his 
determination before the following evening. 

While this conversation concluded they 
were in Naples, and at the gates of the 
Vivaldi palace, where they separated for the 
remainder of the night. 



CHAPTER It. 

SINCE Vivaldi had failed to procure an 
explanation of the words of the monk, 
he determined to relieve himself from the 
tortures of suspense respecting a rival, by 
going to Villa Altieri and declaring his pre- 
tensions. On the morning immediately 
following his late adventures he went thither, 
and on inquiring for Signora Bianchi, was 
told that she could ciot be seen. With much 
difficulty he prevailed upon the old house- 
keeper to deliver a request that he might be 
permitted to wait upon her for a few moments. 
Permission was i;ranted him, when he was 
conducted into the very apartment where he 
had formerly seen EUena. It was unoccupied, 
and he was told that Signora Bianchi would 
be there presently. 

During this interval he was agitated at one 
moment with quick impatience, and at another 
with enthusiastic pleasure, while he gazed on 
the altar whence he bad seen Eilena rise, and 
where, to his fancy, she still appeared, and 
on every object on which he knew her eyes 
had lately dwelt. These objects, so familiar 
to her, had in the imagination of Vivaldi ac- 
quired somewhat of the sacred cnaracter she 
bad impressed upon his heart, and affected 
him in some degree as her presence would 
have done. He trembled as he took up the 
lute she had been accustomed to touch, and, 
when he awakened the chords, her own voice 
seemed to speak. A drawing, half-finished, 
of a dancing nymph remained on a stand, 
and he immediately understood that her hand 
had traced the h'nes. It was a copy from 
Herculaneum, and, though a copy, was 
touched with the spirit of original genius. 
The light steps appeared almost to move, and 
the whole figure displayed the airy lightness 
of exquisite grace. Vivaldi perceived this to 
be one of a set that ornamented the apart- 
ment, and observed with surprise that they 
were the particular subjects which adorned 
his father's cabinet, and which he had under- 
stood to be the only copies permitted from the 
o^ihals in the Royal Museum. 

Every object on which his eyes rested 
seemed to announce the presence of Eilena ; 
and the very flowers that so gaily embellished 



the apartment breathed foith a perfume 
which fascinated his senses and affected bis 
imagination. Before Signora Bianchi ap- 
peared, his anxiety and apprehension had 
Increased so much that, be'i'-.ving re should 
be unable to support himself in h r presence, 
he was more than once upon the poiut of 
leaving the housp. At lergfh he h^'ard her 
approaching step from the hall, and his breath 
almost forsook him. 1 he figure of Signora 
Bianchi was not of an order to inspire admir- 
ation, and a spectator mi^ht have smiled to 
see the perturbation of Vivaldi, his faltering 
step and anxious eye, as he advanced to meet 
this venerable lady, as he bowed upon her 
faded hand, and listened to her querulous 
voice. She received him with an air of re- 
serve, and some moments passed before he 
could recollect himself sufficiently to explain 
the purpose of his visit ; yet this, when he 
discovered it, did not apparently surprise 
her. She listened with composure, though 
with somewhat of a severe co lUtenance, to 
his protestations of regard for her niece ; and 
when he implored her to intercede for him in 
obtaining the hand of Eilena. she said, " I 
cannot be ignorant that a family of your rank 
must be averse to a union with one of mine ; 
nor am I unacquainted that a full sense of the 
value of birth is a marking feature in the 
characters of the Marchese and Marchesa di 
Vivaldi. This proposal must be disagreeable 
or, at least, unknown to them : and I am to 
inform you, signer, that though Signora di 
Rosalbi is their inferior in rank, she is their 
equ.il in pride." 

Vivaldi di<<dainpd to p»«varicate, yet was 
shocked to own the tiuth thus abruptly. The 
ingenuous manner, however, with which he at 
length did this, and the energy of a passion 
too eloquent to be misunderstood, somewhat 
soothed the anxiety of Bianchi, with whom 
other considerations began to arise. She 
considered that from her own age and infirm- 
ities she must very soon, in the course of 
nature, leave Eliena a young and friendless 
orphan, still somewhat dependent upon her 
own industry, and entirely so on her discre- 
tion. With much beauty and little knowledge 
of the world, the dangers of her future situa- 
tion appeared in vivid colours to the afifection- 
ate mind of Signora Bianchi ; and she some< 
times thought that it might be right to sacri- 
fice considerations which in other circum- 
stances would be laudable, to the obtaining 
for her niece the protection of a husband and 
a man of honour. If, in this instance, she 
descended from the lofty integrity which 
ought to have opposed her consent that 
Eilena should clandestinely enter any family, 
a consideration of her parental anxiety may 
soften the censiu'e she deserved. 

But, before she determined upon this sub- 
ject, it was necessary to ascertain that Vivaldi 
was worthy of the confidence ^Vvt Tc&^joX w 



X4 THE ITALIAN. 

pose in him. To try, also, the constancy of the outline of Vesuvius appeared distinctly, 
his affection, she gave litUe present encourage- but the mountain itself was dark and silent, 
ment to bis hopes. His request to see EUena 'Vivaldi heard only the quick and eager 
she absolutely refused, till she should have voices of some Lazaroni at a distance on the 
considered further of his proposals : and his shore, as they contended at the simple game 
inquirywhether hehadarivaf, and, if hehad, of morra. From the bowery lattices of a 
whetKer EUena was disposed to favour him, pavilion within the orangery he perceived a 
she evaded, fearing that a reply would give light, and the sudden hope which it occa- 
more encouragement to his hopes than it sioned of seeing EUena alinost overcame 
might hereafter be proper to confirm. him. It was impossible to resist the oppor- 

Vivaldi at length took his leave, released, tunity of beholding her, yet he checked the 
indeed, from absolute despair, but scarcely impatient step he was taking, to ask himsdf 
encouraged to hope : ignorant that he had a whether it was honourable thus to steal upon 
rival ; yet doubtful whether EUena honoured her retirement, and become an unsuspected 
himself with any share of her esteem. observer of her secret thoughts. But the 

He had received permission to wait upon temptation was too powerful for his honour- 
Signora Bianchi on a future day, but tUl able hesitation ; the pause was momentary, 
that day should arrive time appeared motion- and stepping lighdy towards the pavilion, he 
less, and, since it seemed utterly impossible placed himself near an open lattice, so as to 
to endure this interval of suspense, his be shrouded from observation by the branches 
thoughts on the way to Naples were whoUy of an orange-tree, while he obtained a fuU 
engaged in contriving the means of concluding view of the apartment. EUena was alone, 
it, till he reached the well-known arch, and sitting in a thoughtful attitude, and holding 
locked round, though hopelessly, for his her lute, which she did not play. She 
mysterious tormentor. The stranger did not appeared lost to a consciousness of surround- 
appear ; and Vivaldi pursued the road, de- ing objects, and a tenderness was on her 
tem^ned to revisit the spot at night, and also countenance which seemed to tell him that 
to return privately to Villa Altieri, where he her thoughts were engaged by some interest- 
hoped a second visit might procure for him ing subject. Recollecting that, when last he 
some relief from his present anxiety. had seen her thus, she pronounced his name. 

When he reached home he found that the his hope revived, and he was going to discover 
Marchese, his father, had left an order for him himself and appear at her feet, when she 
to wait his arrival, which he obeyed ; but spoke, and he paused, 
the day passed without his return. The "Why this unreasonable pride of birth 1" 
Marchesa, 'when she saw him, inquired, with said she. "A visionary prejudice destroys 

f2. look that ■ expressed much, how he had our peace. Never would I submit to enter 
engaged' himself of late, and completely a family averse to receive me ; they shaU learn, 
frustfated his plans for the evening by re- at least, that I inherit nobility of soul. Oh, 
quiring him to attend her to Portici. Thus Vivaldi ! but for this unhappy prejudice ! — " 
he was prevented from receiving Bonarmo's Vivaldi, while he listened to this, was 

, determination, from watching at Paluzzi, and immovable ; he seemed as if entranced. The 

. from revisiting EUena's residence. sound of her lute and voice recalled him, and 

He remained at Portici the foUowing even- he heard her sing the first stanza of the very 

- ing, and on his return to Naples, the Mar- air with which he had opened the serenade on 
chese being again absent, he continued a former night, and with such sweet pathos as 

• ignorant of the intended subject of the inter- the composer must have felt when he was 

. view. A note from Bonarmo brought a refusal inspired with the idea, 
to accompany him to the fortress, and urged She paused at the conclusion of the first 
him to forbear so dangerous a visit. Being stanza, when Vivaldi, overcome by the tempt- 
for this night unprovided with a companion ation of such an opportunity for expressing 
for the adventure, and unwilling to go alone, his passion, suddenly struck the chords of his 
Vivaldi deferred it to another evening ; but lute, and replied to her in the second. The 
no consideration could deter him from visiting tremor of his voice, though it restrained his 
Villa Altieri. Not choosing to soUcit his tones, heightened its eloquence. EUena in- 
friend to accompany him thither, since he had stantly recoUected it ; her coloiu: alternately 
refused his first request, he took his solitary faded and returned ; and, before the verse 
lute, and reached the garden at an earlier concluded, she seemed to have lost all con- 
hour than usual. sciousness. Vivaldi was now advancing into 
The sun had been set above an hom-, but . the pavUion, when his approach recalled her ; 
the horizon still retained somewhat of a she waved him to retire, and before he could 
saffron brilliancy, and the whole dome of the spring to her support she rose and would 
sky had an appearance of transparency, have left the place, had he not Interrupted 
peculiar, to this enchanting climate, which her and implored a few moments' attention, 
seemed to diffuse a more soothing twilight " It is impossible," said EUena. 
over the reposing world. In the south-east " Let me only bear you say that I am not 



THE ITALIAN. 



n 



hateliil to you," rdoined Vivaldi, *'that this 
intrusion htas not deprived me of the regard 
with whidi bat now you acknowledged you 
honoured me — - " 

" Oh, never, never I " interupted Ellena, 
impatiently. '* Forget that I ever made such 
acknowledgment I forget that you ever heard 
it I I knew not what I said." 

'<Ah, beautiful Ellena! do you think it 
possible I ever can forget it ? It will be the 
solace of my solitary hours, the hope that 
shall sustain me *' 

' ' I cannot be detained, signor," interrupted 
EUena, still more embam^sed, '*or forgive 
myself for having permitted such a con- 
versation." But as ^e spoke the last words 
an involuntary simile seemed to contradict 
their meaning. Vivaldi believed the smile in 
spite of the words, but before he could ex- 
press Uie lightning joy of conviction, she had 
left the pavilion. He followed through the 
garden, but she was gone. 

From this moment Vivaldi seemed to have 
arisen into a new existence : the whole world 
to him was Paradise ; that smile seemed im- 
p'essed upon his heart for ever. In the 
nilness of present joy he believed it impossible 
that he could ever be unhappy again, and 
defied the utmost malice of future fortune. 
With footsteps light as air he returned to 
Naples, nor once remembered to look for his 
old monitor on the way. 

The Marchese and his mother being from 
home, he was left at his leisure to indulge the 
rapturous recollection that pressed upon his 
mind, and of which he was impatient of a 
moment's interruption. All night be either 
traversed his apartment with an agitation 
equal to that which anxiety had so lately 
iimicted, or composed and destroyed letters 
to Ellena ; sometimes fearing that he had 
written too much, and at others fearing that 
he had written too little ; recollecting cir- 
cumstances which he ought to have mentioned, 
and Uunenting the cold expression of a passion 
to whidi it appeared that no language could 
do justice. 

By the hour when the domestics had risen, 
he had, however, completed a letter some- 
what more to his satisfaction, and he de- 
spatched it to Villa Altieri by a confidential 
person. But the servant had scarcely quitted 
the gates, when he recollected new arguments 
which he wished to urge, and expressions to 
change of the utmost importance to enforce 
his meaning, and he would have given half 
Uie world to have recalled the messenger. 

In this state of agitation he was summoned 
to attend the Marchese, who had been too 
much engaged of late to keep his own ap- 
pointment. Vivaldi was not long in doubt as 
to the subject of this interview. 

*' I have wished to speak with you," said 
the Marchese, assuming an air of hau!;[hty 
seterity, "upon a subject of the utmost im* 



r>rtance to your honour and happiness ; and 
wished, also, to give you an opportunity of 
contradicting a report which would have 
occasioned me considerable uneasiness if I 
could have believei it. Happily I had too 
much confidence in my son to credit this, 
and I affirmed that he understood too well 
what was due to his family and himself to 
take any step derogatonr from the dignity of 
either. My motive tor this conversation, 
therefore, is merely to afford you a moment 
for refuting the calumny I shall mention, and 
to obtain for myself authority for contradicting 
it to the persons who have communicated it 
to me." 

Vivaldi waited impatiently for the conclusion 
of this exordium, and then begged to be in- 
formed of the subject of the report. 

*• It is said," resumed the Marchese, "that 
theni is a young woman who is called Ellena 
Rosalfoa^— I think that is the name— do you 
know any person of the name?" 

*• Do I know 1 " exclaimed Vivaldi—** but 
pardon me ; pray proceed, my lord." 

The Marchese paused, and regarded his 
son with sternness, but without siu-prise. " It 
is said that a young person of this name has 
contrived to fascinate your affections and——" 

" It is most true, my lord, that Signora 
Rosalba has won my afifections," interrupted 
Vivaldi, with honest impatience, "but with- 
out contrivance." 

*' I will not be interrupted," said the 
Marchese, interrupting in his turn. *' It is 
said that she has so artfully adapted her 
temper to yours that, with the assistance of 
a relation who lives with her, she has re- 
duced you to the degrading situation of her 
devoted suitor." 

" Signora Rosalba, my lord, has not yet 
allowed me to assume that honourable title," 
said Vivaldi, unable longer to command his 
feelings. He was proceeding when the Mar- 
chese again check^ him. '• You avow your 
folly, then?" 

•• My lord, I glory in my choice." 

"Young man," rejoin^ his father, "as 
this is the arrogance and romantic enthusiasm 
of a boy, I am willing to forgive it for once, 
and, observe me, only for once. If you will 
acknowledge your error, and -4nstantly dis- 
miss this new favourite " 

"My lord!" 

" You must instantly dismiss her," repeated 
the Marchese, with sterner emphasis : ' ' and to 
prove that I am more merciful than just, I am 
willing, on this condition, to allow her a small 
annuity as some reparation for the depravity 
into which you have assisted to sink her." 

"My lord I" exclaimed Vivaldi, aghast, 
and scarcely daring to trust his voice, *'my 
lord! — depravity?" struggling for breath. 
*' Who has dared to pollute her spotless fame 
. by insulting your ears with such infamous 
falsehood ? Tell me, I cotvysxt '^csv\» \T&\axi!^ 



■^ 


»'^.' 


^•. 


" .• ■ 


■»•■»• 




. ^^ 


l^.iTr #.*/• 


*r 


*l".^ 


•■1 


• ■ 


.. / 


. .' 






^ 


■ 


• * 


r •.-*. 


.# 


■ ^ 


■'/: 










*:f ", -•. 


i^ 


.*' 


•«i-.^^.' 


1 


%, T 





»'i v.^fim^j' ; * %••. 5...-.-. :■..#?:* •,.n.'lr-w.?*:/t --ai •■-.:! •.*tz:r^ z. ••-nr simlv. 

*v ■•/*' »■■• »■■•!■ f.^' I • f'.i! ."Sir li#; *-si rr.m '*i *•" — -Sat ■■".'U. xrs n&F & 

• v. •■•■•7 , -..-I. rf './^ rt«j^iif.'» tnrt V :i lii^nnnr. mn icr a u.igiip it 

'•A.fj^^ ■ •• ■ ; .'■•'* '-•■' •ni:=!.-j^' r f^ r £. ■ '."y vjii/t :ic "armies if 

V. ■■..'«! •••x5r*.*B:r -.ir:;. v :.i ''.-.•.': -^Karrtfi rrr-rn 

<^,.. ^^ - ■• « -.■.'*• .'1 . ri »-.i; -,i-» irr,j^rj». "li ncraprrord "d az 

^v% ■«■ •-'.■ V.-* .#* rv": ■«• .•- 1^ A ; i.: ■ -r in: Mi.iufi z*t n.^.jxciinBX cae 

'x/ .x^" ', ■'.•-■I r- i *. ^.' X 1 -: "-T-i^ :rjr :r l luis. 3e "v^B- -scnai^ JOB 

.•■^^ /. « ,«• ^. .*/i^ r. -^ ", %^. -v. V, %*■;. V. ir»r>e-»t a ".iiuue Lits nines ic &9i^ 

.»^/.»- , • .■ - <«^^./; ••in' -^ r. v*«rrf«.'7 v.r :.-f.-.r-.;3a.'.tT -.le >LirTSi9r ani \1« 

f'.^ /,/•'..« ^ •^« ':.f5er*c .=. ^^^^(la. :::r»agninqp tk 3BiBfrf' 

'••^A'///: ;•/•• w'.-"^ «-,./\ f '*'.v,* '. .i»-i ^',-.. •-.^r.-. V* '^vixiizryt 11 

■»r* M, ■'-'■•;'.'/ '.'»/' «■ •' f ;/:•/*'. v;. '>ft /-••;.*-•.- rMt:T.-:i3 'be 

f»ft fff.^y*' i,*-f Uft t^i- .t1**.t'f\ fv./ ».'./>» lAf/^rrMkr-t. *» to adkc^jvj 

»»T-i ♦>, .4 ^ ' # '/; >.' ^ • i.*tAt^t ' '/Jt.n* ' -" n.Ttf.^ *A Eucna's insooe&ce : acd the Mat^ 

" /!/ |^/'f<, . I '/.,/,;/ Ut u,f -m'ft'A, r/f/ i/yr'l, '.Fi^«« ^z'. jklly uxu'iccesscl in hiscBdeanmn 

i»rw* r),^ « »/ ,f /,/ ^f \ttff,u,iu-* utf m.lr," v» '*''/'k..u inm bis sea a pramae dal he 

tt'iHiMi 7i /.■»'}», «fji»i ii li'ioff »ii t '/'n,*^.:ir.'Ai wOi.'J V*: Kffl" no more. 
0hi'h •»ti'i'fthf*i Mi<- **fiih»n*. wri'l ihr •■/fj;!;^- Mfr;'K th'Ti was Vira^di. who only a iev 

f<'rff «rf ^ ntt'i', >. itnti'i fcht/ft K'/^f^ b^fore hid ezperienoed abapp^ 

'/fit* 'lit*- > "ii'i fh«i M^f ti''::'-. Kf.'fi ii riT'.^ Vi stiifjremc as to efface all impRWOiii 

t'i'iU nl Ut*-ttmit'*' 'IimI'iIii, ffiii' it tm .u^*iit,iiy oi ti.*: MM, and to annihilate erery ooosiden^ 

^^^^MH^l^.,| »,/ 0,u" nl ttu\nj jil.iffK. " \\ f ti'n Of ihc future ', a joy so full that it pei^ 

fii.lff.,f.i| irf,M "rfiiif «'f fiif f'»r|/ri wi.^f \% lUif mitir'l htrn not to believe it possiUe that he 

hn^\tt- hnu'iin iff fitHt li'iMv, I woul'l Utt ryrt c«iuM nvtir nj^iiin taste of misery; he, who 

*\)>'t.]H,m /'fit II « my n'lh " Ii;iij fi'it ns il that moment was an eteraitf* 

"'Off "liy," aifi iiiiiMifl Vivttlili, in nri XfivKfiiny^ him independent of all othen — 

n\fuhi nt "iiiiiii iiitij |iiici(iif<M9. "why dhoiild f vni hf; w.in fhtis M>on fallen into the rrgkn 

I Im< in il'iKK'-i Iff hiiiMiiilMf/ Hhiil In ihin III of tlliir nnri iiifTming! 

fMlhMi, Mrhi>M I mil iiMlytinci'ififif/ whiilUihin 'I h«- \nr.m:m (onflict of passion appeared 

III hiMi'iMii> whuil mil Hilly fh h-MiliiiK hrt r<tii!li'M. I IiHovcd his father, and would have 

whu Im«« nil iitlii'i tif iliiiihil liiti r Why iiiiiy ln'i-ii mfir« hhfirkrrl to consider the vexation 

liiii I III. |ii-iiiiihii| iif iififiM llii iliill»« till mil hi< wim infiNirin;; lor him, had he not been 

ut'uMf Mm II- il Ill wrh.ii H iiiiiy, I will irM-iittiil nl tht: contempt he expressed for 

•IiImhI ihi. ii|i|iii. .Ill, MMi| Hhiiy III ihi< vhiim KIIimiii. llif ndorrd KlIcMia. and, while he fdt 

whMi ii.«»-lii> nil. ih.ti i i« ihii fiiM iliiiy III tim iinprnctiaihtlity of resigning his hopes, 

hiiiiHitiiy III ihi Ml Via, my hml, il it imiM wiih i*(|tiiilly Indignant at the slander which 

liH toll, I Mill itiiilv lit liMiiini'ii tiihniiir iluiira iin«clrcl hrr namo, and impatient to avenge 

III ihi. (.i.tiiiihiii III ,1 iiiiiiit|i|ii whhh iiUHhl llmtnNuli upon the original defamer. 
iiii«|iiii(i| .ill hi.iii« Mint iiii|Hi| nil uriiiiim. I Though the displeasure of the Marchese 

Mhiili 1 1.1.1 ii(iii|iiiii tli0 hiiitiMir nt my tiitutin liy conri*rning a marriage with Ellenahad been 

iiiUiriiiiil i.i lia ,li,.i,,i,« " Hlrfticiy forcsreii. the experience of it was 

■ \Vhi.|ii \n iiiii tiititil|ilii," krtdl ihn Miir- nrvrrer ami more painful than Vivaldi had 

• lit^a, Imimiiuiiilv, "ulilih nhiill Irnoh v«»i Imhulnnl ; while the indignity offered to 
l»» i|lmt|iiiy a i.idun f ^^ hniu \t, ihn vlilun which Kllnm wan ns unexpected as intolerable. But 
WWII (iiftiMhi \i.|| t,i iti«i:hiil0 your unillv ?" this clrvumstance furnished him with addi- 



THE ITALIAN. 17 

tiansl argument for addressing her, for if it wishes, was now so strongly oonvincerl of 

had been possible that his love could have the prudence of such an engagement for hrr 

paused, his honour seemed now engaged in niece that she determined to prevarl cavt hrr 

her behalf, and since he had been a means of reluctance, though she perceived ihtt th s 

ST2llying her fame, it became his duty to re- must be by means more gradual and per- 

store it Willingly listening to the dictates suasive than she had believ«i necessary. On 

of a duty so plausible, he determined to the evening when Vivaldi had surpri>ed from 

persevere in his original design. But his first EUena an acknowledgment of her sentiments, 

efforts were directed to discover her slanderer, her embarrassment and vexation, on her re- 

and recollecting with suxprise those words of turning to the house, and relating what had 

the Marchese which had confessed a know- occurred, sufficiently exjT- ssed to Signora 

ledge of his evening visits to Villa Alticri, the Blanchi the exact situation ot her heart. And 

doubtful warnings of the monk seemed ex- when, on the following; morning, his letter 

plained. He suspected that this man was at arrived, written with the simplicity and energy 

once the spy of his steps and the defaraer of of truth, the aunt neglected not to adapt her 

his love, till the inconsistency of such conduct remarks upon it to the character of Kllena 

with the seeming friendliness of his admoni- with her usual address, 

tions struck Vivaldi, and compelled him to Vivaldi, after the late intetA-iew with the 

believe the contrary. Marchese, passed the remainder of the day 

Meanwhile, the heart of Ellena had been in considering various plans which might 

little less tranquil. It was divided by love discover to him the person who had abused 

and pride ; but had she been acquainted with the credulity •f his father ; and in the even- 

the circumstances of the late interview ing returned once more to Villa Altieri, not 

between the Marchese and Vivaldi, it would in secret, to serenade the dark balcony of hi.i 

have been divided no longer, and a just mistress, but openly, and to converse with 

r^ard for her ,own dignity would instantly Signora Bianchi, who now received him more 

have taught her to subdue without difficulty courteously than on his former visit. Attri- 

tfais infant affection. buting the anxiety in his countenance to the 

Signora Bianchi had informed her niece uncertainty concerning the disposition of her 

of the subject of Vivaldi's visit ; but she had niece, she was neither surprised or offended, 

softened the objectionable circumstances that but ventured to relieve him from a part of it 

attended his proposal, and had, at first, by encouraging his hopes. Vivaldi dreaded 

naerely hinted that it was not to be supposed lest she should inquire further respecting the 

his family would approve of a connection sentiments of his family, but she spared both 

with any person so much their inferior in rank his delicacy and her own on this point ; and, 

as herself. Ellena, alarmed by this sugges- after a conversation of considerable lenjgth, 

tion, replied that, since she believed so, she he left Altieri with a heart somewhat soothed 

had done right to reject Vivaldi's suit ; but by approbation and li^^htencd by hope. 

her sigh, as she said this, did not escape the although he had not obtained a sight of EUeoa. 

observation of Bianchi, who ventured to add The disclosure she had made of her senti- 

that she had not absolutely rejected his offers, ments on the preceding evening, and the hints 

While in this and future conversations she had received as to those of his family, 

Ellena was pleased to conceive her secret wrought upon her mind with too much effect 

admiration thus justified by an approbation to permit an interview. 

so indisputable as that of her aunt, and was Soon after bis return to Naples, the Mar- 

wiUing to believe that the circumstance chesa, whom he was surprised to find dis- 

which had alarmed her just pride was not so engaged, sent for him to her closet, where 

humiliating as she at first imagined, Bianchi a scene passed similar to that which had 

was careful to conceal the real considerations occurred with his father, except that the 

which had induced her to listen to Vivaldi, Marchesa was more dexterous in her ques- 

beins; well assured that they would have no tions and more subtle in her whole conduct, 

weight with Ellena. whose generous heart and and that Vivaldi never for a moment forgot 

inexperienced mind would have revolted from the decorum which was due to a mother, 

mingling any motives of interest with an Managing his passions rather than exasperat- 

engagement so sacred as that of mairiage. ing them, and deceiving him with respect to 

When, however, from further deliberation the degree of resentment she felt from his 

upon the advantages which such an alliance choice, she was less passionate than the 

must secure for her niece, Signora Bianchi Marchese in her observations and remon- 

determined to encourage his views, and to strances, perhaps only because she entertained 

direct the mind of Ellena, whose affections more hope than he did of preventing the evil 

were already engaged on her side, the opinions she contemplated. 

of the latter were found less ductile than had Vivaldi quitted her unconvinced by her 

been expected. Sbe was shocked at the idea arguments, unsubdued by her prophecies, and 

of entering clandestindy the family of Vivaldi, unmoved in his designs. He was not alarmed. 

But Bianchi, whose infirmities urged her because he did not sufficiently Mtv!d«c^\«sAV«c 



i 



i8 THE ITALIAN, 

character to apprehend her purposes. De- many disliked him, and more feared him. 

spairing to effect these by open violence, she His figure was striking, but not so from 

called in an auxiliary of no mean talents, and grace ; it was tall, and, though extremely thin, 

whose character and views well adapted him his limbs were large and uncouth, and as he 

to be an instrument in her hands. It was, stalked along, wrapped in the black garments 

perhaps, the baseness of her own heart, not of his order, there was something terrible in 

either depth of reflection or keenness of pene- its air, something almost superhuman. His 

tration, which enabled her to understand the cowl, too, as it threw a shade over the Hvid 

natureof his, and she determined to modulate paleness of his face, increased its severe 

that nature to her own views. character, and gave an effect to his large 

There Hved in the Dominican convent of melancholy eye which approached to horror, 

the Santo Spirito, at Naples, a man called His was not the melancholy of a sensible 

Father Schedoni ; an Italian, as his name and wounded heart, but apparently that of a 

imported, but whose family was unknown, gloomy and ferocious disposidon. There was 

and from some circumstances it appeared something in his physiognomy extrem'^ly 

that he wished to throw an impenetrable veil singular, and that cannot easily be defined, 

over his origin. For whatever reason, he was It bore the traces of many passions, which 

never heard to mention a relative, or the seemed to have fixed the features they no 

place of his nativity, and he had artfully longer animated. An habitual glooin and 

eluded every inquiry that approached the sub- severity prevailed over the deep Tines of his 

ject which the curiosity of his associates had countenance ; and his eyes were so piercing 

occasionally prompted. There were circum- that they seemed to penetrate, at a single 

stances , however, which seemed to indicate glance, into the hearts of men, and to read 

him a man of birth, and of fallen fortune ; their most secret thoughts ; few persons could 

his spirit, as it had sometimes looked forth support their scrutiny, or even endure to meet 

from under the disguise of his manners, them twice. Yet, notwithstanding all this 

appeared lofty ; it showed not, however, the gloom and austerity, some rare occasions of 

aspirings of a generous mind, but rather the interest had called forth a character upon his 

gloomy pride of a disappointed one. Some countenance entirely different ; and he could 

few persons in the convent, who had been adapt himself to the tempers and passions of 

interested by his appearance, believed that persons whom he wished to concib'ate with 

the peculiarities of his manners, his severe astonishing fecDity, and generally with com- 

reserve and unconquerable silence, his solitary plete triumph. This monk, this Schedoni, 

habits and frequent penances, were the effect was the confessor and secret adviser of the 

of misfortune preying upon a haughty and Marchesa di Vivaldi. In the first effervescence 

disordered spirit ; while others conjectured of pride and indignation which the discovery 

them the consequence of some hideous crime of her son's intended marriage occasioned, 

gnawing upon an awakened conscience. she consulted him on the means of preventing 

He would sometimes abstract himself from it, and she soon perceived that his talents 

the society for whole days together, or when promised to equal her wishes. Each possessed, 

with such a disposition he was compelled to m a considerable degree, the power of assist- 

mingle with it, he seemed unconscious where ing the other. Schedoni had subtlety with 

he was, and continued shrouded in meditation ambition to urge it ; and the Marchesa had 

and silence till he was again alone. There inexorable pride and courtly influence ; the 

were times when it was unknown whither he one hoped to obtain a high benefice for his 

had retired, notwithstanding that his steps services, and the other to secure the imaginary 

had been watched, and his customary haunts dignity of her house by her gifts. Prompted 

examined. No one ever heard him complain, by such passions, and allured by such views. 

The elder brothers of the convent said that they concerted in private, and unknown even 

he had talents, but denied him learning ; they to the Marchese, the means of accomplishing 

applauded him for the profound subtlety their general end. 

which he occasionally discovered in argument, Vivaldi, as he quitted his mother's closet, 

but observed that he seldom perceived truth had met Schedoni in the corridor leading 

when it lay on the surface ; he could follow it thither. He knew him to be her confessor, 

through ail the labyrinths of disquisition, but and was not much surprised to see him, 

overlooked it when it was undisguised before though the hour was an unusual one. 

him. In fact, he cared not for truth, nor Schedoni bowed his head as he passed, and 

sought it by bold and broad argument, but assumed a meek and holy countenance ; but 

lov^ to exert the wily cunning of his nature Vivaldi, as he eyed him with a penetrating 

in hunting it through artificial perplexities, glance, now recoiled with involuntary emo- 

At length, from a habit of intricacy and tion, and it seemed as if a shuddering pre- 

suspicion, his vitiated mind could receive sentiment of what this monk was preparing 

nothing for truth which was simple and easily for him had crossed his mind, 
coroprdiended. • 

Among his associates no one loved him, 



/ 



THB JTAUAN, 



CHAPTER III. 

VIVALDI, from the period of his last visit 
to Altieri, was admitted a frequent visitor 
to Sigooxz. Bianchi, and Ellena was, at length, 
prevsuled upon to join the party, when the 
conversation was always on indifferent topics. 
Bianchi, understanding the disposition of her 
niece's affections, and the accomplished mind 
and manners of Vivaldi, judged that he was 
more likely to succeed oy silent attentions 
than by a formal declaration of his sentiments. 
By such a declaration, Ellena, till her heart 
was more engaged in his cause, would, per- 
haps, have been alarmed into an absolute 
rejection of his addresses, and this was every 
day less likely to happen, so long as he had 
an opportunity of conversing with her. 

Sjgnora Bianchi had acknowledged to 
Vivaldi that he had no rival to apprehend ; 
that Ellena had uniformly rejected every 
admirer who had hitherto discovered her 
within the shade of her retirement, and that 
her present reso-ve proceeded mord from con- 
siderations of the sentiments of his family 
than from disapprobation of himself. He 
forbore, therefore, to press his suit, till he 
should have secured a stronger interest in 
her heart, and in this hope he was encouraged 
by Bianchi, whose gentle remonstrances in 
his' favour became every day more pleasing 
and more convincing. 

Several wedcs passed away in this kind 
of intercourse, till Ellena, yielding to the re- 
presentations of her aunt, and to the plead- 
ings of her own heart, received Vivaldi as an 
ac^owledged admirer ; and the sentiments 
of his family were no longer remembered, or, 
if remembered, it was with a hope that they 
might at length be overcome by considerations 
more favourable to herself. 

The lovers, with Signora Bianchi and a 
Signer Giotto, a distant relation of the latter, 
frequently made excursions in the delightful 
environs of Naples ; for Vivaldi was no 
longer anxious to conceal his attachment, 
but wished to contradict any report injurious 
to his love by the publicity of his conduct ; 
while the consideration that Ellena 's name 
had suffered by his late imprudence con- 
tributed, with the unsuspecting innocence and 
sweetness of her manners towards him. who 
had been the occasion of her injuries, to 
mingle a sacred pity with his love, which 
obliterated all family politics from his mind, 
and bound her irrecoverably to his heart. 

These excursions sometimes led them to 
Puzzuoli ; and as, on their return, they glided 
along the moon-lit bay, the melody of 
Italian strains seemed to give enchantment to 
the scenery of its shore. At this cool hour 
the voices of the vine-dressers were frequently 
heard in trio, as they reposed, after the laboiu: 
of the day, on some pleasant promontory, 
under the shade of poplars ; or the brisk 



music of the dance from ilsbemieii, on the 
margin of the waves below. The boatmen 
rested on tbeur oars, while their company 
listened to voices modulated by sensibilitr to 
finer eloquence than it is in the power of'^art 
alone to display; and at others, while they 
observed the airy natural grace which dte> 
tinguishes the dance of the fbhermen and 
peasants of Naples. Frequently as they 
glided round a promontory, whose shaggr 
masses impended far over the sea, such 
magic scenes of beauty unfolded, adorned by 
these dancing groups on the bay beyond, as 
no pencil cotUd do juctice to. The deep, 
clear waters reflected every image of the 
landscape ; the cliffs, branching into wild 
forms, crowned with groves, whose rough 
foliage often spread down their steeps in 
picturesque luxuriance ; the ruined villa on 
some hold point, peeping through the trees ; 
peasants' cabins hanging on the precipices, and 
the dancing figures on the strand— all touched 
with the silvery tint and soft shadows of moon- 
light. On the other hand, the sea, trembling 
with a long line of radiance, and showing 
in the clear distance the sails of vessels steal- 
ing in every direction along its surface, pre- 
sented a prospect as grand as the landscape 
was beautiful. 

One evening that Vivaldi sat with Ellena 
and Signora Bianchi, in the very pavilion 
where he had overheard that short but in- 
teresting soliloquy which assured him of her 
regard, he pleaded with more than his usual 
earnestness for a speedy marriage. Bianchi 
did not oppose his arguments ; ^e had been 
unweU for some time, and, believing herself 
to be declining fast, was anxious to have thefr 
nuptials concluded. She surveyed with languid 
eyes the scene that spread before the paviUon. 
The strong effulgence which a setting sim 
threw over the sea, showing innumerable 
gaily-painted ships, and fishing-boats return- 
ing from Santa Lucia into the port of Naples, 
hsul no longer power to dieer her. Even the 
Roman tower that terminated the mole below, 
touched as it was with the slanting rays, and 
the various figures of fishermen, who lay 
smokingbeneath its walls in the long shadow, 
or who stood in sunshine on the beach, 
watching the approaching boats of their 
comrades, combined a picture which was 
no longer interesting. "Alasl" said she, 
breaking from meditative silence, "this sun 
so glorious, which lights up all the various 
colouring of these shores, and the glow of 
those majestic mountains — alas ! I feel that 
it will not long shine for me — my eyes must 
soon close upon the prospect for ever I " 

To Ellena's tender reproach for this melan- 
choly suggestion Bianchi replied only by 
expressing an earnest wish to witness the 
certainty of her being protected ; adding 
< that this must be soon, or she should not live 
to see it. Ellena, extremely ^b.ocVA^Vy^'CciVr) 



90 



THE ITALIAN. 



this piesage of her aunt's fate, and by the 
direct reference made to her own condition in 
the presence of Vivaldi, burst into tears, while 
he, supported by the wishes of Si^ora Bian- 
chi, urg^ed his suit with increased interest. 

" This is not a time for fastidious scruples," 
said Bianchi, "now that a solemn truth calls 
out to us. My dear girl, I will not disguise 
my feelings ; they assure me I have not long 
to live. Grant me thea the only request I 
have to make, and my last hours will be com- 
forted." 

After a pause she added, as she took the 
hand of her niece, "This will, no doubt, be 
an awful separation to us both ; and it must 
also be a mournful one, signor," turning to 
Vivaldi, "for she has been as a daughter to 
me, and I have, I trust, fulfilled to her the 
duties of a mother. Judge, then, what will be 
her feelings when I am no more. But it will 
be your care to soothe them." 

Vivaldi looked with emotion at Ellena, and 
would have spoken ; her aunt, however, pro- 
ceeded. "My own feelings would now be 
little less poignant if 1 did not believe that I 
was confiding her to a tenderness which can- 
not diminish ; that I should prevail with her 
to accept the protection of a husband. To 
\ou, signor, I commit the legacy of my child. 
Watch over her future moments, guard her 
from inquietude as vigilantly as I have done, 
and, if possible from misfortune ! I have yet 
much to say, but my spirits are exhausted." 

While he listened to this sacred charge, and 
recollected the injury Eilena had already sus- 
tained for his sake by the cruel obloquy which 
the Marchese had thrown upon her character, 
he suflTered a degree of generous indignation, 
of which he scarcely could conceal the cause, 
and a succeeding tendtrness thit almost 
mel'ed him to tears ; and he secretly vowed 
to defend h<'r fame and protect her peace 
at the sacrifice of every other considera- 
tion. 

Bianchi, as she concluded her exhortation, 
gave Ellena's hand to Vivaldi, who received 
it with emotion such as his countenance only 
could express, and with solemn fervour raising 
his eyes to heaven, vowed that he never would 
betray the confidence thus reposed in him, but 
would watch over the happiness of Ellena with 
a care as tender, as anxious, and as unceasing 
as her own ; that from this moment he con- 
sidered himself bound by ties not less sacred 
than those which the Church confers to defend 
her as his wife, and would do so to the latest 
moment of his existence. As he said this, the 
truth of his feelings appeared in the energy 
of his manner. 

Ellena, still weeping, and agitated by various 
considerations, spoke not, but withdrawing the 
handkerchief from her face, she looked at him 
through her tears with a smile so meek, so 
affectionate, so timid, yet so confiding, as ex- 
pr«ss«d all the mingled emotions of her heart. 



and appealed more eloquently to his than tho 
most energetic language could have done. 

Before Vivaldi left the villa, he had some 
further conversation with Signora Bianchi, 
when it was agreed that the nuptials should 
be solemnized in the following week, if Ellena 
could be prevailed on to confirm her consent 
so soon ; and that when he returned the next 
day, her determination would probably be 
made known to him. 

He departed for Naples once more with the 
lightly-bounding steps of joy, which, however, 
when he arrived there, was somewhat alloyed 
by a message from the Marchese, demanding 
to see him in his cabinet. Vivaldi anticipated 
the subject of the interview, and obeyed the 
summons with reluctance. 

He foimd his father so absorbed in thought 
that he did not immediately perceive him. On 
raising his eyes from the floor, where discon- 
tent and perplexity seemed to have held them, 
he fixed a stern regard on Vivaldi. " I under- 
stand," said he, " that you persist in the un- 
worthy pursuit against which I warned you. 
I have left you thus long to your own discre- 
tion, because I was willing to afford you an 
opportunity of retracting with grace the 
declaration which you have dared to make me 
of your principles and intentions ; but your 
conduct has not therefore been the less 
observed. I am informed that yoiu: visits have 
been as frequent at the residance of the un- 
happy young woman who was the subject of 
our former conversation as formerly, and that 
you are as much infatuated." 

" If it is Signora Rosalba whom your lord- 
ship means." said Vivaldi, "she is not un- 
happy ; and I do not scruple to own that I 
am as sincerely attached to her as ever. Why, 
my dear father," continued he, subduing the 
feelings ^^hich this d^rading ti>enrion of 
Ellena had aroused, " why will you peisist in 
opposing the happiness of your son? and 
above all, why will you continue to think un- 
justly of her who deserves your admiration 
as much as my love ? " 

"As I am not a lover," replied the Mar- 
chese, " and the age of boyish credulity 
is past with me, I do not wilfully dose my 
min^ against examination, but am directed 
by proof and yield only to conviction." 

"What proof is it, my lord, that has thus 
easily convinced you ? " said Vivaldi. ' * Who 
is it that persists in abusing vour confidence, 
and in destroying my peace? *' 

The Marchese haughtily reproved his son 
for such doubts and questions, and a long 
conversation ensued, which failed to alter the 
interests or the opinions of either party. The 
Marchese persisted in accusation and menace ; 
and Vivaldi in defending Ellena, and in 
affirming that his affections and intentions 
were irrecoverable. 

Not any art of persuasion could prevail 
with the Marchese to adduce his proofs, or 



I 



THE ITALIAN, 



ddiTer op the name of his informer ; nor any 
menace awe Vivaldi into a renunciation cxf 
£Uena ; and they parted mutually dissatisfied. 
The Maichese \aA failed on this occasion to 
act vrith his usual policy, for his menaces and 
acctaations had aroused spirit and indigna- 
tion, when kindness and gentle remonstrance 
would certainly have awakened filial affection, 
and might have occasioned a contest in the 
breast of Vivaldi. Now, no struggle of 
opposing duties divided his resolution. He 
had no hesitation on the subject of dispute ; 
but, regarding his father as a haughty 
oppressor, who would rob him of his most 
sacred right, and as one who did not scruple 
to stain the name of the innocent and the 
defenceless, when his interest required it, upon 
thd doubtftil authority of a base informer, he 
suffered neitherpity nor remorse to mingle with 
the resolution of asserting the freedom of his 
nature, and was even more anxious than be- 
fore to conclude a marriage which he be- 
lieve would secure his own happiness, and 
the reputation of Ellena. 

He returned, therefore, on the following 
morning, to Villa Altieii with increased im- 
patience to learn the result of Signora 
Bianchi's further conversation with her niece, 
and the day on which the nuptials might be 
solemnized. On the way thither, his thoughts 
were wholly occupied by Ellena, and he pro- 
ceeded mechanically, and without observing 
where he was, till the shade which the well- 
known arch threw over the road recalled him 
to local circumstances, and a voice instantly 
arrested his attention. It was the voice of the 
monk, whose figure again passed before him. 
•• Go not to Altieri," it said, solemnly, "for 
death is in. the house ! " 

B^ore Vivaldi could recover from the dis- 
may into which this abrupt assertion and 
sudden appearance had thrown him the 
stranger was gone. He had escaped in the 
gloom of the place, and seemed to have 
retired into the obscurity from which he had 
so suddenly emerged, for he was not seen to 
depart from under the arch. Vivaldi pursued 
him with his voice, conjuring him to appear, 
and diemanding who was dead ; but no voice 
replied. 

Believing that the stranger could not have 
passed unseen from the arch by any way but 
that leading to the fortress above, Vivaldi 
b^[8n to ascend the steps, when considering 
that the nore certain means of understand- 
ing this awful assertion would be. to go imme^ 
d'iaiely to Altieri, he left this portentous luin, 
and hastened thither. 

An indifferent person would perhaps have 
understood the words of the monk to allude 
to Signora Bianchi, whose infirm stat*^ of 
health rendered her death, though sudden, 
not impobable ; but to the af&ighted fancy of 
Vivaldi the d3ring Hlena only appeared. His 
fears, however probabilities might sanction, 



or the event justify them, were natural to 
ardent affection ; but they were accompanied 
by a presentiment as extraordinary as it was 
horrible : it occurred to him, more than once, 
that Ellena was murdered. He saw her 
wounded and bleeding to death; saw her 
ashy c luntenance, and her wasting eyes, from 
which the spirit of life was fabt departing, 
turned piteously on himself, as if imploring 
him to save her from the fate that was drag- 
ging her to the grave. And when he reach«l 
the boundary of the garden, his whole frame 
trembled so with horrible apprehension that 
he rested a while, unable to venture further 
towards the truth. At kngth he summon«l 
courage to dare it, and unlocking a private 
gate, of which he had lately received the key, 
because it spared him a considerable dis- 
tance of the road to Naples, he approached 
the house. Ail around it was silent and for- 
saken ; many of the lattices were closed, and, 
as he endeavoured to collect from every trivial 
circumstance some conjecture, his spirits still 
sank as he advanced, till, having arrived 
within a few paces of the portico, all his fears 
were confirmed. He heard from within a 
feeble sound of lamentation, and then a few 
notes of that solemn and peculiar kind of 
recitative which is ia some parts of Italy the 
requiem of the dying. The sounds were so 
low and distant that they only murmured on his 
ear ; but, without ()ausing for information, he 
rushed into the portico, and knocked loudly 
at the folding doors, now closed against 
him. 

After repealed summonses, Beatrice, the old 
housekeeper, appeared. She did not wait for 
Vivaldi's inquiries. "Alas I signer," said 
she, • ' alas-a-day ! who would have thought 
it ! who would have expected such a change 
as this 1 It was only yester-evening that you 
was here— she was then as well as I am ; 
who would have thought that she would be 
dead today ? " 

"She is dead, then I" exclaimed Vivaldi, 
struck to the heart ; "she is dead t" stag- 
gering towards a pillar of the hall, and en- 
deavouring to support himself against it. 
Beatrice, shocked at his condition, would 
have gone for assistance, but he waved her 
to stay. "When did she die?" said he, 
drawing breath with difficulty; "how and 
where?" 

" Alas I here in the villa, signer," replied 
Beatrice, weeping. " Who would have 
thought that I should live to see this day ? I 
hoped to have laid down my old bones in 
peace." 

"What has caused her death?" inter- 
rupted Vivaldi, impatiently ; ' ' and when did 
she die?" 

" About two of the clock this morning, 
signor, about two o'clock. Oh, miserable day, 
that I should live to see it ! " 

" I am better," said VW^V1\ \^'sj»^\!OR»^ 



THE ITALIAN. 



self. '* Lead me to her apartment— I must 
see her. Do not hesitate ; lead me on." 

"Alas 1 signor, it is a dismal sight ; why 
should you wish to see her ? Be persuaded ; 
do not go, signor ; it is a woeful sight 1 " 

*' Lead me on," repeated Vivaldi, sternly ; 
"or if you refuse, I will find the way myself." 

Beatrice, terrified by his look and gesture, 
no longer opposed him, begging only that 
he woiHd wait until she had informed her 
lady of his arrival : but he followed her 
closely up the staircase, and along a corridor 
that led round the west side of the house, 
which brought him to a suite of chambers 
darkened by the closed lattices, through 
which he passed towards the one where the 
body lay. The requiem had ceased, and no 
sound disturbed the awful stillness that pre- 
vailed in these deserted rooms. At the door 
of the last apartment, where he was com- 
pelled to stop, his agitation was such that 
Beatrice, expecting every instant to see him 
sink to the floor, made an effort to support 
him with her feeble aid, but he gave a signal 
for her to retire. He soon recovered him- 
self, and passed into the chamber of death, 
the solemnity of which might have affected 
him in any other state of his spirits ; but 
these were now too severely pressed upon by 
real suffering to feel the influence of load 
circumstances. Approaching the bed on 
which the corpse was laid, he raised bis eyes 
to the mourner who hung weeping over it, 
and beheld — Ellena ! who, surprised by this 
sudden intrusion, and by the agitation of 
Vivaldi, repeatedly demanded the occasion 
of it. But he had neither power nor inclina- 
tion to explain a circumstance which must 
deeply wound the heart of Ellena, since it 
would have told that the same event which 
excited her grief had accidentally inspired 
his joy. 

He did not long intrude upon the sacred- 
ness of sorrow, and the short time he re- 
mained was employed in endeavours to com- 
mand his own emotion and to soothe hers. 

When he left Ellena, he had some conver- 
sation with Beatrice as to the death of Signora 
Bianchi, and understood that she had retired 
to rest on the preceding night apparently in 
her usual state of health. 

" It was about one in the morning, signor," 
continued Beatrice, '• I was waked out of my 
first sleep by a noise in my lady's chamber. 
It is a grievous thin^ to me, signor, to be 
waked from my first sleep ; and I, Santa 
Maria forgive me ! was angry at being dis- 
turbed. So I would not get up. but laid my 
head upon the pillow again, and tried to 
sleep ; but presently 1 heard the noise again. 
Nay, now, says I, somebody must be up in 
the house, that's certain. I had scarcely yaid 
so, signor, when I heard my young lady's 
voice calling ' Beatrice ! Beatrice ! ' Ah I 
poor young lady, she was indeed in a sad 



fright, as well she might be. Sfa^ was at my 
door in an instant, and looked as pale as 
death, and trembled so. 'Beatrice,' said 
she, ' rise this moment ; my aimt is dying.' 
She did not stay for my answer, but was 
gope directly. Santa Msuia protect me! I 
thought I should have swoon^ outright" 

"WeU, but your lady?" said Vivaldi, 
whose patience the tedious circumlocution of 
old Beatrice had exhausted. 

" Ah 1 my poor lady, signor ; I thought I 
never should have been able to reara her 
room ; and when I got there I was scarcely 
more alive than herself. There she lay on 
her bed ! Oh, it was a grievous sight to see 1 
There she lay, locking so plteouslyr I saw 
she was djring. She could not speak, though 
she tried often ; but she was sensible, for she 
would look so at Signora Ellena. and then 
try again to speak ; it almost t>roke one's 
heart to see her. Something seemed to lie 
upon her mind, and she tried almost to the 
last to tell it ; and as she grasped Signora 
EUena's hand, she would stUl look up in her 
face with such doleful expression as no one 
who had not a heart of stone could bear. 
My poor young mistress was quite overcome 
by it, and cried as if her heart woiild break. 
Poor young lady ! she has lost a friend in- 
deed ; such a one as she must never hope to 
see again." 

" But she shall find one as firm and afifec- 
tionate as the last 1" exclaimed Vivaldi, fer- 
vently. 

•' 'The good saint grant it may prove so," 
replied Beatrice, doubtingly. *' All that could 
be done for our dear lady, " she continued, 
"was tried, but with no avail. She could 
not swallow what the doctor offered her. 
She grew fainter and fainter, yet would often 
utter such deep sighs, and would then grasp 
my hand so hard! At last she turned her 
eyes from Signora Ellena, and they grew 
duller and fix^, and she seemed not to see 
what was before her. Alas ! I knew then she 
was going ; her hand did not press mine, as 
it had done a minute or two Isefore, and a 
deadly coldness was upon it. Her face 
changed so, too, in a few mintites* This was 
about two o'clock, and she died before her 
confessor could administer." 

Beatrice ceased to speak, and wept ; Vivaldi 
almost wept with her, and it was some time 
before he could command his vc^ce sufficiently 
to inquire what were the symptoms of Sig- 
nora Bianchi's disorder, and whether she had 
ever been thus suddenly attacked before. 

"Never, signor i" replied the old house- 
keeper; "and though, to be sure, she has 
long been very infirm, and going down, as 
one may say, yet — " 

" What is it you mean ?" said Vivaldi. 

"Why, signor, I do not know what to 
think about my lady's death. To be sure, 
there is nothing certain ; and I may only gel 



THE ITALIAN. 



93 



•Oo£fed at if I speak my mind abroad, for 
nobody would believe me — it is so strange— yet 
t must have my own thoughts, for all that." 

"Do speak intellisjibly," said Vivaldi; 
"you nted not apprehend censure from 
me." 

"Not from you, sfgnor, but if the report 
should get abroad, and it was known that I 
had set it going." 

••That shall never be known from me," 
said Vivaldi, with increased impatience; 
"tell me, without fear, all that you conjec- 
ture." 

" Well the«, signer, I will own that I do 
not like the suddenness of mv lady's death ; 
no, nor the manner of it, nor her appearance 
after death f ** 

"Speak explicitly and to the point." said 
Vivaldi. 

"Nay, signor, there are some folks that 
will not understand if you speak ever so 
plain ; I am sure I speak plain enough. If 
I might tell my mind— I do not believe she 
came fairly by her death at last ! " 

" How 1 " said Vivaldi. *• Your reasons?" 

" Nay, signor, I have given them already ; 
I said I did not like the suddenness of her 
death, nor her appearance after, nor " 

" Good heaven ! " interrupted Vivaldi. 
"You mean poison 1 " 

" Hush, signor, hush ! I do not say that ; 
but she did not seem to die naturally." 

" Who has been at the villa lately? " said 
^^valdi, in a tremulous voice. 

"Alas ! signor, nobody has been here ; 
she lived so privately that she saw nobody." 

"Not one person?" said Vivaldi. "Con- 
sider well, Beatrice ; had she no visitor ? " 

" Not of a long while, signor ; no visitors 
but yourself and her cousin Signor Giotto. 
The only other person that has been within 
these Walls for many weeks, to the best of my 
remembrance, is a sister of the convent, who 
comes for silks my young lady embroiders." 

" Embroid.ers ! What convent? '* 

"The Santa Maria della Pieta, yonder, 
signor; if you will step this way to the 
window, I will show it you. Yonder, among 
the woods on the hill-side, just above those 
gardens that stretch down to the bay. There 
is an olive ground close l)eside it ; and ob- 
serve, signor, there is a red and yellowish 
ridge of rocks rises over the woods higher 
still, and looks as if it would fall down upon 
those old spires. Have you found it, signor ? " 

••How long is it since this sister came 
here?" said Vivaldi. 

•* Three weeks, at least, signor." 

"And you are certain that no other person 
has called within that time ? " 

"No otilier, signor, except the fisherman 
and the gardener, and a man who brings 
macaroni, and such sort of things ; for it is 
such a long way to Naples, signor, and I 
liave so little time." 



" Three weeks, say you ? You said three 
weeks. I think ! Are you certain ns to this ? " 

"Three weeks, signor ! Santa Molla Pieta I 
Do you believe, signor, that %e could fast 
for three weeks? Why, they call almost every 
day." 

" I speak of the nun," said Vivaldi. 

"Oh, yes, signor," replied Beatrice ; "it is 
that, at least, since she was here." 

"This is strange." said Vivaldi, musing ; 
" but I will talk with you some other time. 
Meanwhile, I wish you could contrive that I 
should see the face of your deceased lady 
without the knowledge of Signora Ellena. 
And, observe me, Beatrice, be strictly silent 
as to your surmises concerning her death : 
do not suffer any negligence to betray your 
suspicions to your young mistress. Has she 
any suspicions herself of the same nature ? " 

Beatrice replied that she believed Signora 
Ellena had none ; and promised faithfully to 
observe his injunctions. 

He then left the villa, meditating on the 
circumstances he had just learned, and on 
the prophetic assertion of tlie monk, between 
whom and the cause of Bianchi's sudden 
death he could not forbear surmising there 
was some connection ; and it now occurred 
to him, and for the first time, that this monk, 
this mysterious stranger, was no other than 
Schedoni, whom he had observed of late 
going more frequently than usual to his 
mother's apartment. He almost started in 
horror of the suspicion to which this conjec- 
ture led, and precipitately rejected it as a 
p ;ison that would destroy his own peace for 
ever. But though he instantly dismissed the 
suspicion, the conjecture returned to his 
mind, and he endeavoured to recollect the 
voice and figure of the stranger, that he 
might compare them with those of the con- 
fessor. The voices were, he thought, of a 
different tone, and the persons of a different 
height and proportion. This comparison, 
however, did not forbid him to surmise that 
the stranger was an agent of the confessor's ; 
that he was, at least, a secret spy upon his 
actions, and the defamer of Ellena ; while 
both, if indeed there were two persons con- 
cerned, appeared to be at the command of 
his parents. Fired with indignation at the 
unworthy arts that he believed to have been 
employed against him, and impatient to meet 
the slanderer of Ellena, he determind to at- 
tempt some decisive step towards a discovery 
of the truth ; and either to compel the con- 
fessor to reveal it to him, or to search out his 
agent, who, he fancied, was occasionally a 
resident within the ruins of Paluzzi. 

The inhabitants of the convent which 
Beatrice had pointed out, did not escape 
his consideration ; but; no reason appeared 
for supposing them the enemies of his Ellena, 
who, on the contrary, he undetstooci^ \sa.^ 
been for some "^eax^ ^mcaMv^ ^yswckssx^ 



a4 THE ITALIAN. 

with them. The embroidered silks, of which were fixed in an expression at once 8eva:e and 

the old servant had spoken, sufficiently ex- crafty. The Marchesa was listening with 

plained the nature of the connection ; and deep attention, her head inclined towards 

discovering more fully the circumstances of him, as if to catch the lowest murmur of his 

Ellena's fortune, her conduct heightened the voice, and her £Ebce picturing the anxiety and 

tender admiration with which he had hitherto vexation of her mind. This was evidently a 

regarded her. conference, not a confession. 

The hints for suspicion which Beatrice had Vivaldi advancing, the monk raised his 

given respecting the cause of her mistress's eyes ; his countenance suffered no change 

decease incessantly recurred to him ; and it as they met those of Vivaldi. He rose, but 

appeared extraordinary, and sometimes in the did not take leave, and retinned the slight and 

highest degree improbable, that any person somewhat haughty salutation of Vivaldi with 

could be sufficiently interested in the death of an inclination of the head that indicated a 

a woman apparently so blameless as to ad- pride without pettishness, and a firmness bor- 

minister poison to her. What motive could dering on contempt. 

have prompted so horrible a deed was still The Marchesa, on perceiving her son, was 
more inexplicable. It was true that she had somewhat embarrassed, and her brow, bef<M:e 
long been in a declining state ; yet the sud- slightly contracted by vexation, now frowned 
dcnness of her departure, and the singularity with resentment. Yet it was an involuntary 
of some circumstances preceding as well as emotion, for she endeavoured to chase the 
some apprarances that had followed it. com- expression of it with a smile. Vivaldi like^d 
pelled Vivaldi to doubt as to the cause. He the smile still less than the frown, 
believed, however, that, after having seen the Schedoni seated himself quietly, and began, 
corpse, bis doubts must vanish ; and Beatrice with almost the ease of a man of the world, 
had promised that, if he could return in the to converse on general topics. Vivaldi, how- 
evening, when Ellena had retired to rest, he ever, was reserved and silent : he knew not 
should be permitted to visit the chamber of how to begin a conversation which might 
the deceased. There was something repug- lead to the knowledge he desired« and the 
nant to his feelings in going thus secretly, or*, Marchesa did not relieve him from tlie diffi- 
indeed, at all, to the residence of Ellena at culty. His eye and his ear assisted him to 
this delicate period, yet it was necessary he conjecture, at least, if not to obtain, the in- 
should introduce there some medical professor formation he wished ; and, as he listened to 
on whose judgment he could rest respecting the deep tones of Schedoni's voice, he became 
the occasion of Bianchi's death ; and as he almost certain that they were not the accents 
believed he should so soon acquire the right of his unknown adviser; though he considered, 
of vindicating the honour of Ellena, that at the same moment, that it was not difficult 
consideration did not so seriously affect him to disguise or to feign a voice. His stature 
as otherwise it would liave done. The in- seemed to decide the question more reason- 
quiry which called him thither was, besides, abljr ; for the figure of Schedoni appeared 
of a nature too solemn and important to be taller than that of the stranger ; and though 
lightly resigned ; he had therefore, told there was something of resemblance in their 
Beatrice he would be punctual to the hour air which Vivaldi had never observed before, 
she appointed. His intention to search for he again considered that the habit of the 
the monk was thus again interrupttd. same order, which each wore, might easily 

" OJCision an artificial resemblance. Of the 

likeness, as to coimtenance, he could not 

CHAPTER IV. judge, since the strant;er's had been so much 

WHEN Vivaldi returned to Naples, he shrouded by his cowl that Vivaldi had never 
inquired for the Marchesa, of whom distinctly seen a single feature. Schedoni's 
he wished to ask some questions concerning hood was now thrown back, so that he could 
Schedoni, which, though he scarcely expected not compare even the hair of their heads un- 
they would be explicitiv answered, might yet der similar circumstances ; but as he r«^ mem- 
lead to part of the truth he sought for. bered to have seen the confessor on a former 

The Marchesa was in her closet, and day approaching his mother's closet with the 

Vivaldi found the confessor with her. *' This cowl shading his face, tht* same gloomy severity 

man crosses me hke my evil genius," said he seemed to characterise both, and neary the 

to himself as he entered ; •• but I will know same terrible portrait was drawn on his fancy, 

whethi-r he deserves my suspicions before I Yet this again might be only an artificial 

leave the room." effect, a character which the cowl only gave 

Schedoni was so deeply engaged in conver- to the head : and any face seen imperfectly 

sation that he did not immediately perceive beneath its dark shade might have appeared 

Vivaldi, who stood for a moment examining equally severe. Vivaldi was still extremely 

his cotmtenance, and tracing subjects for perplexed in his opinion. Onecircimistance, 

curiosity in its deep lines. His eyes, while be however, seemed to throw some light on his 

spoke, were cast downward, and his features judgment. The stranger had appcSurediathe 



THE ITALIAN, ^5 

habit of a monk, and, if Vivaldi's transient "That well may be, signor," replied the 

observation might be trusted, he was of the confessor calmly ; "there are many brethren 

very same order with that of Schedoni. Now who, no doubt, resemble each other : but the 

if he were Schedoni, or his agent, it was not brothers of the Black Penitents are clothc»d 

probable that he would have shown himself in sackcloth, and the death's head on the 

m a dress that might lead to a discovery of garment, the peculiar symbol of this order, 

his person. That he was anxious for con- would not have esctped your observation ; it 

oealment, his manner had strongly proved ; could not, therefore, be a member of their 
it seemed, then, that this habit of a monk 



society whom ^ou have seen." 
" I am not inclined to thinly 



was only a disguise, assumed for the purpose " I am not inclined to think that it was," 

of misleading conjecture. Vivaldi, however, said Vivaldi ; "but be it who it may, I hope 

determined to put some questions to Schedoni, soon to be better acquainted with him and 

and at the same time to observe their eft'tct to tell him truths so strong that he shall not 

on his countenance. He took occasion to be permitted even to affect the misunderstand- 

notice some drawings of ruins, which orna- ing of them." 

mented the cabinet of the Marchesa, and to " You will do right, if you have cause of 

say that the fortress of Paluzzi was worthy of complaint against him," observed Schedoni. 

bemg added to her collection. "And onlyM I have cause of complaint, 

"You have seen it lately, perhaps, reve- holy father? Are strong truths to be told 

rend father," added Vivaldi, with a pene- only when there is direct cause of complaint ? 

trating glance. Is it only when we are injured that we are to 

"It is a striking relic of antiquity," re- be sincere?" He believed that he had now 

plied the confessor. detected Schedoni, who seemed to have be- 

" That arch," resumed Vivaldi, his eye still trayed a consciousness that Vivaldi had reason 

fixed on Schedoni, "that arch suspended for complaint against the stranger, 

between two rocks, the one overtopped by "You will observe, reverend father, that t 

the towers of the fortress, the other shadowed have said I am injured," he added. '* If 

with pine and broad oak, has a fine effect, you know that I am, this must t}e by other 

But a picture tA it would want human figures, means than by my words ; I have not even 

Now either the grotesque shapes of banditti expressed resentment." 

lurking within the ruin, as if ready to start "Except by your voice and eye, signor," 

out upon the traveller, or a friar rolled up in replied Schedoni, drily. " When a man is 

bis black garments, just stealing forth from vehement and disordered, we usually are in- 

under the shade of the arch, and looking like clined to suppose he feels resentment, and 

some supernatural messenger of evil, would that he has cause of complaint, either real or 

faxV\i the piece. " imaginary. As I have not the honour of being 

The features ofSchedoni suffered no change acquainted with the subject you allude to, I 

during these remarks. " Your picture is com- cannot decide to which of the two your cause 

plete, " said be, ' ' and I cannot but admire the belongs. " 

facitity with which you have classed the monks " I have never been in doubt as to that,'* 

together with banditti." said Vivaldi, haughtily ; " and if I have, you 

" Your pardon, holy father," said Vivaldi ; will pardon me, holy father, but I should not 

" I did not draw a parallel between them." have requested your decision. My injuries 

" Oh, no offence, signor," replied Schedoni, are, alas 1 too real ; and I now think it is also 

with a smile somewhat ghastly. too certain to whom I may attribute them. 

During the latter part of this conversation. The secret adviser, who steals into the bosom 
if conversation it maybe called, the Marchesa of a family only to poison its repose, the in- 
had followed a servant, who had brought her former, the bnse asperser of innocence, stand 
a letter, out of the apartment, and as the con- revealed in one person." 
fessor appeared to await her return, Vivaldi Vivaldi delivered these words with a tem- 
determined to press his inquiry. " It appears, pered energy, at once dignified and pointed, 
however." said he, '* that Paluzzi, if not which seemed to strike directly to the heart 
haunted by robbers, is at least frequented by of Schedoni : but whether it was his con- 
ecclesiastics ; for I have seldom passed it science or his pride that took the alarm, did 
without seeing one of the order, and that one not certainly appear. Vivaldi believed the 
has appeared so suddenly, and vani>hed so former. A dark malignity overspread the 
^uddenIy, that I have been almost compelled features of the monk, and at that moment 
to believe he was literally a spiritual being ! " Vivaldi, thought he beheld a man whose 

" The convent of the Black Penitents is not passions might impel him to the perpetration 

lar distant,^* observed the confessor. cf almost any crime, how hideous soever. He 

* • Does the dress of this convent resemble recoiled from him as if he had suddenly seen 

that of your order, reverend father ? For I a serpent in his path, and stood gazing on his 

observed that the monk I speak of was habited face with an attention so wholly occupied as 

like yourself ; aye, and he was about your to be unconscious that he did so. 

ttatiuVf and very much resembled you»" Schedoni almost ixv^VanxV] \«5:.<(aN«:t^\&:a!kf> 



36 THE ITALIAN. 

self ; his features relaxed from their first its pUini and the rdative proportions of evezy 
expression, and that portentous darkness energy and weakness of its nature. He by- 
passed away from his countenance ; but, with lieved, also, be could turn the very virtues of 
a look that was still stem and haughty, he this young man against himself ; and he ex- 
said, "Signer, however ignorant I may be of ulted, even while the smile of gnod-will was 
the subject of your discontent, I cannot mis- yet upon his countenance^ in anticipating the 
understand that vour resentment is, to some moment that should avenge him for the past 
extent or other, directed against myself as the outrage, and which, while Vivaldi was in- 
cause of it. Yet I will not suppose, signor, I genuously lamenting it, he had apparently 
say I will not suppose," raising his voice sig- forgotten. 

nificantly, " that you havedar^ to brand me Schedoni was thus ruminating evil against 
with the ignominious titles you have just Vivaldi, and Vivaldi was considering how be 
uttered ; but " might possibly make Schedoni atonement for 

" I have applied them to the author of my the affront he had offered him, when the Mar- 
Injuries, " interrupted Vivaldi ; ' ' you, father, chesa returned to the apartment, and perceived 
can best inform me whether they applied to in the honest countenance of Vivaldi some 
yourself." symptoms of the agitation which had passed 

" I have then nothing to complain of," said over it ; his complexion was flushed, and his 
Schedoni, adroitly, and with a sudden calm- brow slightly contracted. The aspect of 
ness that surprised Vivaldi. ' ' If you directed Schedoni told nothing but complacency, ex- 
them against the author of your injuries, cept that now and then when be looked at 
whatever they may be, I am satisfied." Vivaldi it was with half-shut eyes, that indi- 

The cheerful complacency with which he cated treachery, or, at least, cunning, trying 
spoke this renewed the doubts of Vivaldi, to conceal exasperated pride, 
who thought it nearly impossible that a man The Marchesa, with displeasure directed 
conscious of guilt could assume, under the against her son, inquired the reason of his 
very charge of it, the tranquil s^id digni6ed emotion ; but he, stung with consciousness of 
air which the confessor now displayed. He his conduct towards the monk, could neither 
began to accuse himself of having condemned eodure to qxplain it or to remain in her 
him with passionate rashness, and gradually presence ; and, saying that he would confide 
became shocked at the indecorum of his con- his honoiur to the discretion of the holy father, 
duct towards a man of Schedoni's age and who would speak only too fiayourably of his 
sacred profession. Those expres^ons of fault, he abruptly left the room, 
countenance which had so much alarmed When he had departed, Schedom gave, with 
him, he was now inclined to think the effect seeming reluctance, the explanation which ^e 
of a jealous and haughty honour ; and he Marchesa required, but was cautious not to 
almost forgot the malignity which had min- speak too favourably of Vivaldi's conduct, 
gled with Schedoni's pnde, in sorrow for the which, on the contrary, he represented as 
offence that had provoked it Thus, not less much more insulting than it really was ; and, 
precipitate in his pity than his anger, and while he aggravated the offensive part of it, 
credulous alike to the passion of the moment, he suppressed all mention of the candour and 
he was now as eager to apologise for his error self-reproach which had followed the cluEirge. 
as he had been hasty in committing it. The Yet this he managed so artfully that he 
frankness with which he apologised and la- appeared to extenuate Vivaldi's errors, to 
mented the impropriety of his conduct would lament the hastiness of his temper, and to 
have won an easy forgiveness from a generous plead for a forgiveness from his irritated 
heart. Schedoni listened with apparent com- mother. " He is very young," added the 
placency and secret contempt. He regarded monk, when he perceived that he had 
Vivaldi as a rash boy, who was sway^ only sufficiently exasperated the Marchesa against 
by his passions ; but while he suffered deep her son ; " he is very young, and youth is 
resentment for the evil in his character, he warm in its passions and precipitate in its 
felt neither respect nor kindness for the good, judgments. He was, besides, jealous, no 
for the sincerity, the love of justice, the gene- doubt, of the fri«ndship, with which you are 
rosity. which threw a brilliancy even on his pleased to honour me ; and it is natural that 
foibles. Schedoni, indeed, saw only evil in a son should be jealous of the attention of 
human natiure. such a mother." 

Had the heart of Vivaldi been less generous, " You are too good, father," said the Mar- 
he would now have distrusted the satisfaction chesa; her resentment increasing, towards 
which the confessor assumed, and have dis- Vivaldi in proportion as Schedoni displayed 
covered the contempt and malignity that his artificial candour and meekness, 
lurked behind the smile thus imperfectly " It is true," continued the confessor, 
masking his countenance. The confessor "that I perceive all the inconveniences to 
perceived his power, and the character of which my attachment, I should say my duty, 
Vivaldi lay before him as a map. He saw, to your family exposes me ; but I wUlingly 
or fancied he saw, every line and feature of $ubmi^ to these, while it |s yet possible tha( 



THE ITALIAN. nj 

iay advice may be a means of preserving the took the lamp from Beatrice, and dismissed 
honour of your house unsulBed, and of saving her. As the light ^[lared on the livid face of 
this inconsiderate young man from future the corpse, Vivaldi gaxed with melancholy 
misery and unavailing repentance." surprise ; and an effort of reason was neces- 

D^ing the warmtii of this sjrmpathy in sary to convince him that this was the same 
resentment, the Marchesa and Schedoni mu- countenance which only one evening pre- 
tnaily and sincerely lost their remembrance of ceding was animated like his own ; which 
the unworthy motives by which each knew had looked upon him in tears, while, with 
the other to be influenced, as well as that dis- anxiety the most tender, Bianchi had com- 
gust which those who act together to the mitted the happiness of her niece to his care, 
same bad end can seldom escape from feeling and had. alas 1 too justly predicted her ap- 
towards their associates. The Marchesa. proaching dissolution. The circumstances 
while she commended the fidelity of Sche- of that scene now appeared to him like a 
doni. forgot his views and her promises as to vision, and touched every fibre of bis heart, 
a rich benefice ; while the confessor imputed He was fully sensible of the imporcance of 
ha anxiety for the splendour of her son's the trust committed to him, and as he now 
condition to a real interest in his welfare, not hung over the pale and deserted form of 
a care of her own dignity. After mutual com- Bianchi. he silently renewed his solemn vows 
pliments had been exchanged, they proceeded to Ellena, to deserve the confidence of her 
to a long consultation concerning Vivaldi, departed guardian. 

and It was agreed that their efforts for what Before Vivaldi had courage enough to ask 
ihty termed his preservation should no longer the opinion of the physician, who was still 
be -confined to remonstrances. viewing the face of the deceased with very 

.^_ earnest attention and a disapproving counte- 

nance, his own suspicions strengthened from 
CHAPTER V. some circumstances of her appearance ; and 

VIVALDI, when his first feelings of pity particularly from the black tint that pre- 
and compunction for having insulted vailed over her complexion, it seemed to bim 
an aged man. the member of a sacred pro- that her dea'h had t>een bv poison. He 
fession, were past, and when he looked with feared to break a silence whicn prolonged his 
a more delibemte eye upon some circum- hope of the contrary, freble though it was; 
stances of the confessor's conduct, perceived and the physician, who probably was appre- 
that suspicion was again gathering on his hensive of the consequence of delivering his 
mind. But, regarding this as a symptom of real thought, did not speak, 
bis own weakness, rather than as a hint of "I read your opinion," said Vivaldi, at 
truth, he endeavoured, with a magnanimous length ; '* it coincides with my own." 
disdain, to reject every surmise that boded "I know not as to that, signor," replied 
unfevourably of Schedoni. the physician ; ' ' though I think I perceive 

When evening arrived, he hastened towards what is yours. Appearances are unfavour- 
Villa Altieri. and having met, without the able, yet I will not take upon me to decide 
dty. according to appointment, a physician firom them that it is as you suspect. There 
upon whose honour and judgment he thought are other circumstances under which similar 
he might rdy, they proceeded on their way appearances might occur." He gave his 
together. Vivaldi had forgotten, during the reasons for this assertion, which were plau- 
confusion of his last interview with Ellena. sible 'even to Vivaldi, and concluded by 
to deliver up the key of the garden-gate, and requesting to speak wiUi Beatrice. " For I 
he now entered it as usual, though he could wish to understand," said he. ** what was the 
not entirely overcome the reluctance which exact situation of this lady for some hours 
he felt on thus visiting, in secret and at previous to her decease." 
i^ght. the dwelling of Ellena. Under no After a conversation of some length with 
otiber circumstances, however, could the phy- Beatrice, whatever might be the opinion result- 
sidan. whose opinion was so necessary to his ing from his inquiries, he adhered nearly to his 
peace, be introduced without betraying a former assertions ; pronouncing that so many 
suspicion which must render her unhappy, contradictory circumstances appeared as ren- 
perhaps for ever. dered it impossible for him to decide whether 

Beatrice, who had watciled for them in the Bianchi had died from poison or otherwise, 
portico, led the way to thtt chamber where He stated, more fully than he had done before, 
the corpse was laid- out ; and Vivaldi, though the reasons which must render the opinion of 
considerably affected when he entered, soon any medical person on this subject doubtful, 
recovered composure enough to talce his But whether it was that he feared to be re- 
station on one side of the l>ed, while the sponsible for a decision which would accuse 
physldan placed himself on the other. Un- some person of murder, or that he really was 
wflling to expose his emotion to the observa- inclined to believe that Bianchi died natursdiy, 
tion Of a servant, and desirous also of some it is certain he seemed disposed to adopt the 
private conversation with the physician, he latter opinion, and that he vra&^^n vKsivma 



38 



1rH& itALIAN. 



to quiet the suspicions of Vivaldi. He so 
far succeeded, indeed, as to convince him 
that it would be unavailing to pursue the in- 
quiry, and at length almost compelled him 
to believe that she had departed according 
to the common course of nature. 

Vivaldi, having lingered awhile over the 
death-bed of BiaDchi, and taken a last fare- 
well of her silent form, quitted the chamber 
and the house as softly as he had approached, 
and unobserved, as he believed, by Eilena or 
any other person. The morning dawned 
over the sea when he returned into the gar- 
den, and a few fishermen, loitering on the 
beach or putting off their little boats from 
the shore, were the only persons visible at 
this early hour. The time, however, was 
past for renewing the inquiry he had pur- 
posed at Paluzzi, and the brightening dawn 
warned him to retire. To Naples, therefore, 
he returned, with spirits somewhat soothed 
by a hope that Bianchi had not fallen pre- 
maturely, and by the certainty that Ellena 
was well. On the way thither he passed the 
fort without interruption, and, having parted 
with the physician, was admitted into his 
father's mansion by a confidential servant. 



CHAPTER VI. 

ELLENA, on thus suddenly losing her 
aunt, her only relative, the friend of her 
whole life, felt as if left alone in the world. 
But it was not in the first moments of afflic- 
tion that this feeling occurred. Her own 
forlorn situation was not even observed, 
while affection, pity, and irresistible grief for 
Bianchi occupied her heart. 

Bianchi was to be interred in the church 
belonging to the convent of Santa Maria della 
Pieta. The body, attired according to the 
custom of the country, and decorated with 
flowers, was carried on an open bier to the 
place of interment, attended only by priests 
and torch-bearers. But Ellena could not 
endure thus lightly to part with the relics 
of a beloved friend, and bein^ restrained by 
custom from following the corpse to the grave, 
she repaired first to the convent to attend the 
funeral service. Her sorrow did not allow her 
to join in the choral symphonies of the nuns, 
but their sacred solemnity was soothing to 
her spirits, and the tears she shed while she 
listened to the lengthening notes assuaged 
the force of grief. 

When the service concluded, she withdrew 
to the parlour of the Lady Abbess, who 
mingled with her consolations many en- 
treaties that Eilena would make the convent 
her present asylum ; and her affliction re- 
quired little persuasion on this subject. It 
was her wish to retire hither, as to a sanctuary, 
which was not only suitable to her ixurticular 
drcumstaiKies, but especially adapted to the 
present ^te gi her spirits. Here she believed 



that she should sooner acquire resignMkm, 
and regain tranquillity, than in a place ksfi 
consecrated to religion ; and before she took 
leave of the Abbess it was agreed that she 
should be received as a boarder. To acquaint 
Vivaldi with her intention was, indeed, her 
chief motive for returning to Villa Altieri, 
after this her resolution had been taken. Her 
affection and esteem bad been gradual in 
their progress, and had now attained a degree 
of strength which promised to decide the 
happiness or misery of her whole life. The 
sanction given by her aunt to this choice, and 
particularly the vary solemn manner in which, 
on the evening preceding her death, she be- 
queathed Ellena to Vivaldi's care, had still 
more endeared him to her heart, and imparted 
a sacriKdness to the engagement which made 
her consider him as her guardian and only 
surviving protector. The more tenderly sh^ 
lamented her deceased relative, the more ten- 
derly she thought of Vivaldi ; and her love fpr 
the one was so intimately connected with her 
affection for the other that each seemed 
strengthened and exalted by the union. 

When the funeral was over they met at 
Altieri. 

He was neither surprised nor averse to her 
withdrawing awhile to a convent ; for there 
was a propriety in retiring, during the period 
of her grief, firom a home where she had no 
longer a guardian, which delicacy seemed to 
demand. He only stipulated that he might 
be permitted to visit her in the parlour of the 
convent, and to claim, when decorum should 
no longer object to it, the hand which Bianchi 
had resigned to him. 

Notwithstanding that he yielded to this 
arrangement without complaining, it was not 
entirely without repining ; but being assured 
by Ellena of the worthiness of the Abbess 
of \jai Pieta, he endeavoured to silence the 
secret murmurs of his heart with the con- 
viction of his judgment. 

Meanwhile, the deep impression made by 
his unknown tormentor, the monk, and es- 
pecially by the prediction of the death of 
Bianchi, remained upon his mind, and he 
once more determined to ascertain, if possible^ 
the true nature of the portentous visitant, and 
what were the mouves which induced him 
thus to haunt his footsteps and interrupt his 
peace. He was awed by the circumstances 
which had attended the visitations of the 
monk, if monk it was ; by the suddenness of 
his appearance and departure, by the truth 
of his prophecies, and, above all, by 
the solemn event which bad verified his 
last warning ; and his imagination, thus 
elevated by wonder and painful curiosity, was 
prepared for something above the reach of 
common conjecture, and beyond the accom- 
plishment of human agency. His understand- 
ing was sufflciently clear and strong to teach 
him to detect many errors of opinion that 



THE ITALIAN, tf 

{irevailed ai^ound him, as well as to despise apprehend >%hat is possibly. And is it then 
the common superstitions of his country; possible that I yet may lose you ; and is it 
and, in the usual state of his mind, be only probable that you may be mine for ever? 
probably would not have hesitated for a How, under such circumstances, could I 
moment on the subject before him ; but his weakly consent to your retirement? Why 
passions were now interested and his fancy did I not urge you to bestow immediatfly 
awakened, and though he was unconscious those indissoluble bands which no human 
of this propensity, he would, perhaps, have force can burst asunder? How could I leave 
been somewhat disappointed to have de« the destiny of all my peace within the reach 
scend^l suddenly from the region of fearful of a possibility which it was once in my 
sublimity, to which he had soared — the world power to have removed I Which it was in 
of terrible shadows!— to the earth on which my power ! It is, perhaps, still in my power, 
he daily vpdked, and to an explanation simply O Ellena 1 let the severities of custom yield 
natural. to the security of my happiness. If you do 

He designed to visit again, at midnight, go to La Pieta, let it be only to visit its 
the fortress of Paluzzi, and not to watch for aJtar ? " 

the appearance of the stranger, but to carry Vivaldi delivered this expostulation with a 
torches into every recess of the ruin, and rapidity that left no pause for EUena to in- 
discover, at least, whether it was haunted by temipt him. When, at length, he concluded, 
any other human being than himself. The she gently reproadied him for doubting the 
chief difficulty which had hitherto delayed contmuance of her regard, and endeavoared 
him was that of finding a per^n in whom to soothe his apprehension of misfortune, but 
he could confide, to accompany him in the would not listen to his request. She repre« 
search, since his former adventure had sented that not only the state of her spirits 
warned him never to renew it alone. Signor required retirement, but that respect to the 
Bonarmo persisted absolutely, and, perhaps, memory of her aunt demanded it ; and 
wisely, to refuse his request on this subject ; added, gravely, that if he had so little con- 
and as Vivaldi had no other acquaintance to fidence in the steadiness of her opinions as 
whom he chose to give so much explanation to doubt the constancy of her affection, and 
of the affair as might induce compliance, he for so short a period, unless her vows were 
at length determined to take with him Paulo, secured to him, he had done imprudentlf 
his own servant. to elect her for the companion of his whole 

On the evening previous to the day of life. 
Ellena's departure to La Pieta, Vivaldi went Vivaldi, then ashamed of the weakness he 
to Altierito bidheradUeu. During this inter- had betrayed, besought her forgiveness, and 
view his spirits were* more than usually endeavoured to appease apprehensions which 
depressed ; and, though he knew that her passion only made plausible, and which rea- 
retirement was only for a short period, and son reproved ; notwithstanding which, ho 
had as much confidence in the continuance of could recover neither tranquillity nor con> 
her affection as is, perhaps, possible to a fidence : nor could Ellena, though her con- 
lover, Vivaldi fdt as if he was parting with duct was supported and encouraged by just- 
her for ever. A thousand vague and fearful ness of sentiment, entirely remove the oppres- 
conjectures, such as he had never till this mo- sion of spirits she had felt from almost the 
me&t' admitted, assailed him, and amongst first moment of this interview. They parted 
tbeoi it appeared probable Uiat the arts of with manv tears ; and Vivaldi, before he 
the nuns might win her from the world, and finally took his leave, frequently rettuned to 
sacrifice her to the cloister. In her present claim some promise, or to ascertain some 
state of sorrow this seemed to be even more explanation ; till Ellena remarked, with a 
than probable, and not all the assurances forced smile, that these resembled eternal 
which Ellena gave him — and in these parting adieus, rather than those only of a few days : 
moments she spoke with less reserve than she an observation which renewed all his alarm, 
had hitherto done — could reanimate his mind, and furnished an excuse for again delaying 
" It should seem, Ellena, by these boding bis departure. At length he tore himself 
ears," said he, imprudently, "that I am part- away, and left Villa Altieri ; but as the time 
ing with you for ever ; I feel a weight upon was yet too early to suit his purposed inquiry 
my heart which I cannot throw off. Yet I at Paluzzi, he returned to Naples. 
consent that you shall withdraw awhile to this Ellena, meanwhile, endeavouring to dissi- 
oonvent, convinced of the propriety of tne pate melancholy recollections by employment, 
Stsp ; and I ought, also, to know that you continued busied in preparation for her de- 
wfll soon return, that I shall soon take you parture on the following day till a late hour 
from its walls as my wife, never more to leave of the night In the prospect of quitting, 
me, never more to pass from my immediate though only for so short a period, the home 
care and tenderness. I ought to feel assured where she had passed almost every day since 
of aU this ; yet so apt are my fears that I the dawn of her earliest remembrance, there 
«Baaotcoi£deiawbat>prol»able,btttrathtr was something melancholy^ i£ uox vX«8KBk%. 



30 THE ITALIAN. 

In leavlog these well-known scenes, where, voured to interest by her cries the compas* 

it might be said, the* shade of her deceased sion of the people at the post-houses, and 

relative seemed yet to linger, she was quitting by her cries only, for the blinds were closely 

all vestige of her late happiness, all note of drawn. The postilions, no doubt, imposed 

former years and of present consolation ; and on the credulity of these people, for they 

she felt as if going forth into a new and home- were insensible to her distress, and her im- 

less world. Her affection for the place in- mediate companions soon overcame the only 

creased as the passing time diminished, and means that had remained by which she could 

it seemed as if the last moment of her stay make it known. 

would be precisely that in which the Villa For the first hours a tumult of terror and 

Alteri would be most valued. amazement occupied her mind ; but as. this 

In her favourite apartments she lingered began to subside, and her understanding to 

for a considerable time ; and in the room recover its clearness, grief and despondency 

where she had supped on the night immc- mingled with her fears. She saw herself se- 

diately preceding the death of Signora Bi- parated from Vivaldi, probably for ever, for 

anchi, she indulged many tender and mourn- she apprehended that the strong and invisible 

ful recollections, and probably would have hand which governed her course would never 

continued to indulge them much longer, had relinquish its grasp till it had placed her 

not her attention been withdrawn by a sudden irrecoverably beyond the reach of her lover, 

rustling of the foliage that surrounded the A conviction that she should see him no 

vHndow ; when, on raising her eyes, she more came at intervals with such overwhelm- 

thought she perceived some person pass ing force that every other consideration and 

quidcly from before it. The lattices had, as emotion disappeared before it ; and at these 

usual, been left open to admit the fresh breeze moments she lost all anxiety as to the place 

from the bay below, but she now rose with of her destination, and all fear as to her 

some alarm to close them, and had scarcely personal safety. 

done so when she heard a distant knocking As the morning advanced and the heat in- 

from the por'ico, and in the next instant the creased, the blinds were let down a little to 

screams of Beatrice in the hall. admit air; and Ellena then peceived that 

Alarmed for herself. Ellena had. however, only iw<> of ihe men who had appear^ed at 

the courage to hasten to the assistance of her Villa Altieri were in the carnage, and that 

old Servant ; when, on entering the passage they were still disguised in cloaks ai^d visors, 

leading to the hall, three men, masked and She had no means of judging through what 

muffled up in cloaks, appeared, advancing part of the country she was travelling, for 

iVom the opposite extremity. While she re- above thie'^small openings which the blinds 

treated, they pursued her to the apartment left shi cibuld see only the towering tops of 

she had quitted. Her breath and her courage mountilhis, or sonfetlmes the veiny precipices 

were gone, yet she struggled to sustain her- and tafigled thicket? that closely impended 

self, and endeavoured to sisk with calmness over the tOad. 

what was their errand. They gave no reply, Abotii liooii, aS She judged from the exces- 
butthrewa veil over her face, and, seizing her sive heat, the carriage stopped at a post- 
arms, led her almost tinresistingj bat suppli- house, and ice-Water was handed through 
eating, towards the portico. the window ; when, as the bUnd was lowered 

In the hall, Ellena perceived Beatrice to admit It, she percdved herself on a wiM 

bouiid to a pillar, and another ruifian, who and solitary plain surrounded bymottntidnB 

was also masked, watching over and me- and woods. The people at the door of the 

nacing her, not by words but gestures, post-house seemed *' unused to pity or be 

Ellena's shrieks seemed to recall the almost pitied.*' The lean and sallow countenance 

lifeless Beatrice, fbr whom she supplicated as of poverty stared over their gaunt bofies, 

much as for herself ; but entreaty was alike and habitual discontent had fixed the furrows 

unavailing for each, and Ellena was borne of their checks. They regarded Ellena with' 

firom the house and through the garden. All only a feeble curiosity, though the affliction 

consciousness had now forsaken her. On in ner looks might have interested almost 

recovering, she perceived herself in a car- any heart that was not corroded by its oWh 

riage, which was driven with great rapidity, sufferings ; nor did the masked facei of her 

and that her arms were within the grasp of companions exdte a much stronger atten- 

some persons whom, when her recollection tion. 

returned more fully, she believed to be the Ellena accepted the cool refreshment 

men who had carried her from the villa, offered her, the first she had taken on the 

The darkness prevented her from observing road. Her companions, having empded their 

their figures, and to all her questions and en- glasses, drew up the blind, and, notwithstand- 

treaties a deathlike silence was observed. mgthe almost intolerable heat of noon, the car- 

I>t//in£r ihe whole night the carriage pro- ri£^g:e proceeded. Faintingunderitsoppression, 

ceeded rapidlr, stomying only while the Ellena entreated that the windows m%ht be 

ii€»9es were changed, when EIIcdsl endea- open, vrbciitlaftmcd^VfolWLbly in oompliailce 



THB ITALIAN. 31 

with their owo necessity rather than with her bdow it, tog<etber with Che amaang force and 

request, lowered the blinds, and she had a uproar of the foiling waters, combined to 

glimpse of the lofty region of the mountains, render the pass more terrific than the pencil 

but of no object that could direct her conjee- could describe, or language may express, 

ture concerning where she was. She saw Ellena ascended it, not with indiffierence, but 

only pinnacles and vast precipices of various- Mrith calmness ; she experienced somewhat of 

tinted marbles, intermingled with scantv a dreadfid pleasure in looking down upon the 

vegetation, such as stunted pinasters, dwarf- irresistible flood ; but this emotion was 

oak and holly, which gave dark touches to heightened into awe when she perceived 

the many coloured clifls, and sometimes that the road led to a slight bridge, which, 

stretched in shadowy masses to the deep throvm across the chasm at an immense 

valleys, that, winding into obscurity, seemed height, united two opposite cliflfi, between 

to invite curiosity to explore the scenes be- which the whole cataract of the river de- 

yond. Bdow these bold precipices extended scended. The bridge, which was defended 

the gloomy region of olive-trees, and lower onl^ by a slender raiOng, appeared as if hung 

still other rocky steeps sunk towards the amidst the clouds. Ellena, while she wa< 

plains, bearing terraces crowned vrith vines, crossing it, almost forgot her misfortunes, 

and where often the artificial soil was propped Having reached the opposite side of the glen, 

by thickets of Indian>fig, pomegranate, and the n^ gradually descended the precipices 

oleander. for about half a mile, when it opened to cx- 

EUena, after having been so long shut in tensive prospects over plains and towards 

darkness, and brooding over her own alarm- distant mountains— the sunshine landscape 

ing circumstances, found temporary, though which had long appeared to boimd this 

feeble, relief in once more looking upon the shadowy pass. The transition was as the 

face of nature ; till, her spirits being gradually passage through the vale of death to the bliss 

revived and elevated by the grandeur of the of eternity ; but the idea of its resemblance 

images around her, she said to herself, " If did not long remain with Ellena. Perched 

I am condemned to misery, surely I could high among the cli£& of a mountain, which 

endure it with more fortitude in scenes like might be said to terminate one of the jaws of 

these than amidst the tamer landscapes of this terrific defile, and which was one of the 

nature I Here, the objects seem to impart loftiest of a chain that surrounded the plains, 

somewhat of thdr own force, their own sub- appeared the spires and long terraces of a 

limity, to the soul. It is scarcely possible to monastery ; and she soon understood that her 

yield to the pressure of misfortune while we journey was to conclude there, 
walk, as with the Deity, amidst his most stu- At the foot of this mountain her companions 

pendous works I " alighted, and obligfd her to do the same, for 

But soon after, the idea of Vivaldi glancing the ascent was too steep and irregular to admit 
athwart her memory, she melted into tears ; of a carriage. Ellena followed unresistingly, 
the weakness, however, was momentary, and like a lamb to the sacrifice, up a path that 
during the rest of the journey she preserved a wound among the rocks, and was coolly over- 
strenuous equality of mind. shadowed bv thickets of almond-trees, figs. 

It was when the heat and the light were de- broad-leaved myrtle, and ever-green rose- 
dining that the carriage entered a rocky bushes, intermingled with the strawberry 
defile, which showed, as through a telescope tree, beautiful in fruit and blossoms, the 
reversed, distant plains and mountains yellow jasmine, the ddightfiil acacia mimosa, 
opening beyond, lighted up with all the and a variety of other fragrant plants, 
purple splendour of the setung sun. Along These bowers frequently admitted glimpses 
this deep and shadowy perspective, a river, of the glowing country bdow, and sometimes 
which was seen descending among the diffs opened to expansive views bounded by the 
of a moimtain, rolled with impetuous force, snowy mountains of Abruzzo. At every step 
fretting and foaming amidst the dark rodcs were objects which would have afiforded plea- 
in its descent, and then flowing in a limpid sure to a tranquil mind ; the beautifully varie- 
lapse to the brink of other predpices, whence gated marbles that formed the cliffs imme- 
again it fell with thundering strength to the diately above, thdr fractured masses embossed 
abyss, throwing its misty douds of spray high with mosses and flowers of every vivid hue 
in the air, and seeming to claim the sole that paints the rainbow ; the elegance of the 
empire of this solitary wild. Its bed took up shrubs that tufted, and the majestic grace of 
the whole breadth of the chasm which some the palms which waved over them, would 
strong convulsion dfthe earth seemed to have have charmed almost any other eye than 
formed, not leaving space even for a road Ellena's, whose spirit was wrapt in care, or 
along its margin. The road, therefore, was than those of her companions, whose hearts 
carried high among the clilfe, that impended were dead to feeling. Partial features of the 
over the nver, and seemed as if suspended in vast edifice she was api^iooicYim^ ^^^oax^ 
air; while the gloom and vastness of the now and then between lYi^ \i«ts \ ^3ci^\a!\Hi«JL 
predpices which tower^ nborc 9^4 smtk window of the ca\hetoi\, yrv^^ ^^ «^>x^ ^^^^ 



33 



THE ITALIAN, 



overtopped it ; the narrow pointed roofs of 
the cloisters ; angles of the insurmountable 
walls which fencal the garden from the pre- 
cipices below, and. the dark portal leading 
into the chief court ; each of these, seen at 
intervals beneath the gloom of cypress and 
spreading cedar, seemra as if menacing the 
unhappy Ellena with hints of future sujffering. 
She passed several shrines and images hsdf 
hid among the shrubs and the clif& ; and, 
when she drew near the monastery, her com- 
panions stopped at a little chapel which stood 
Deside the path, where, after examining some 
papers, an act which she observed with sur- 
prise, they drew aside, as if to consult re- 
specting herself. Their conversation was de- 
livered in voices so low that she could not 
catch a single tone distinctly, and it is pro- 
bable that if she could, this would not have 
assisted her in conjecturing who thev were ; 
yet the profound silence they had nitherto 
observed had mach increased her curiosity 
now that they spoke. 

One of them soon after quitted the chapel 
and proceeded alone to the monastery, leav- 
ing Ellena in the custody of his comrade, 
whose pity she now made a last, though 
almost hopeless, effort to interest. He replied 
to all her entreaties only by a waving ol the 
hand, and an averted face ; and she endea- 
voured to meet with fortitude and to endure 
with patience the evil which she could neither 
avoid nor subdue. The spot where she 
awaited the return of the ruffian, was not of 
a character to promote melancholy, except, 
indeed, that luxurious and solenm kind of 
melancholy which a view of stupendous 
objects inspires. It overlooked the whole 
extent of plains, of which she had before 
caught partial scenes, with the vast chain of 
mountains, which seemed to form ah insur- 
mountable rampart to the rich landscape at 
their feet. Their towering and fantastic 
summits, crowding together into dusky air, 
like flames tapering to a point, exhibited 
images of peculiar grandeur, while each 
minuter line and feature withdrawing at this 
evening hour from observation, seemed to 
resolve itself into the more gigantic masses, 
to which the dubious tint, the solemn 
obscurity, that began to prevail over them 
gave force and loftier character. The silence 
and deep repose of the landscape served 
to impress this character more awfully 
on the heart; and while Ellena sat wrapt 
in the ihoughtfulness it promoted, the vesper- 
service of the monks, breathing softly from 
the cathedral above, came to her ear.; it was 
a music which mightbc said to win on silence, 
and was in perfect unison with her feelings ; 
solemn, deep, and full, it swelled in holy 
peals, and rolled away in murmurs, which 
rttcntion pursued to the last faint note that 
melted into air. EUena's heart owned the 
power of this high minstrelsy; and while. 



she caught for a moment the sweeter voices 
of the nuns mingUng in the choral response, 
she indulged a hope that they would not be 
wholly insensible to her sufferings, and that 
she should receive some consolation from 
sympathy as soft as these tender-breathing 
strains appeared to indicate. 

She bad rested nearly half an hour on 
the turfy slope, before the chapel, when she 
perceived through the twilight two monks 
descending from the monastery towards the 
spot where she sat. As they drew near, she 
distinguished their dress of grey stuff, the 
hood, the shaven head, where only a coronet 
of white hair was left, and other ensigns of 
their particular order. On reaching the 
chapel, they accosted her companion, with 
whom they retired a few paces and conversed. 
Ellena heard, for the first time, the sound of 
her conductor's voice, and though this was 
but faintly, she marked it well. The other 
ruffian did not yet appear, but it seemed 
evident that these friars had left the convent 
inconsequence of his information ; and some- 
times, when she looked upon the taller of the 
two, she fancied she saw the person of the 
very man whose absence she had remarked, 
a conjecture which strengthened while she 
more accuratdy noticed him. The portrait 
had certainly much resemUance in height and 
bulk ; and the same gaunt awkwardness, 
which even the cloak of the ruffian had not 
entirely shrouded, obtruded itself from under 
the folded garments of the recluse. If 
countenance, too, might be trusted, this 
same friar had a ruffian's heart, and his keen 
and cunning eye seemed habitually upon 
the watch for prey. His brother of the order 
showed nothing strongly characteristic, either 
in his face or manner. 

After a private conversation of some 
length, the friars approached Ellena, and 
told her that she must accompany them to 
the convent ; when her disguised conductor, 
having resigned her to them, immediately 
departed, and descended the mountain. 

Not a word was uttered by either of the 
party as they pursued the steep tract leading 
to the gates of this secluded edifice, which 
were opened to them by a lay-brother, and 
Ellena entered a spacious court. Three sides 
of this were inclosed by- lofty buildings 
lined with ranges of cloisters ; the fourth 
opened to a garden, shaded with avenues of 
melancholy cypress, that extended to the 
cathedra], whose fretted windows and orna- 
mented spires appeared to dose the perspec- 
tive. Other lai^e and detached buildings 
skirted the gardens on the left, while, on the 
right, spacious olive-grounds aud vineyards 
spread to the cliffs that formed a barrier to 
all this side of the domain of the convent. 

The friar, her conductor, crossed the court 
to the north wing, and there, ringing a bell, 
a door was opened by a nun^ into whosel 



TUB iTAUAN. 33 

bands EUena was given. A significant look self and of vour duties. Till the period shall 
was exchanged between the devotees, but no be passed (ox which vou arc given into my 
words ; the friar departed, and the nun, still charge, I shall scrupulously ohierve the obli- 
silent, conducted her through many solitary gations of the troublesome ofl^cc which my 
passages, where not even a distant footfaU regard for the honour of a noble family has 
echoed, and whose walls were roughly induced me to undertake." 
painted with subjects indicatory of the severe By these words the author and the motives 
superstitions of the place, tending to inspire of this extraordinary transaction were at once 
melancholy awe. Ellena's hop)e of pity van- revealed to Ellena, who was for some roo- 
ished^ as her eyes glanced over these sym- ments almost overwhelmed fay the sudden hor- 
bols of the disposition of the inhabitants, rors that gathered on her mind, and she stood 
and on the countenance of the recluse, cha- silent and motionless. Fear, shame, and in> 
nuiterised by a gloomy malignity which dignation alternately assailed her ; and the 
seemed ready to inflict upon others some - sting of offended honour, on being suspected, 
portion of the unhappiness she herself suf- and thus accused, of having voluntarily dis- 
fered. As she glided forward with sound- turbed the tranquillity, and sought the alliance 
less step, her vmite drapery floating along of any family, aud especially of one who dis- 
these solemn avenues, and her hollow fea^ dained her, struck forcibly to her heart ; till 
tures touched with the mingled light and the pride of conscious worth gradually re- 
shadow which the partial rays of a taper she viving her courage and fortifying her pa- 
held occasioned, she seemed like a spectre tience, she demanded by whose will she had 
newly risen from the grave, rather than a been torn from her home, and by whose au- 
living being. These passages terminated in thority slie was now detained, as it appeared, 
the parlour of the abbess, where the nun a prisoner. 

paused, and, turning to Ellena, said, "It is The abbess, unaccustomed to have her 

the hotir of vespers ; you will wait here till power opposed, or her words questioned, 

our lady of the convent leaves the church ; was for a moment too indignant to reply ; 

she would speak with you." and Ellena observed, but no longer with dis- 

'*To what sakU In the convent dedicated?" may, the brooding tempest ree^y to burst 
said Eliena: "and who, sister, presides over her head. "It is I only who am in- 
over it?" jiu:ed," said she to herself; "and shall the 

The nun gave no reply, and after having guilty oppressor triumph, and the innocent 
^ed the forlorn stranger for a moment with sufferer sink under the shame that belongs 
inquisitive ill-nature, quitted the room. The only to guilt 1 Never will I yield to a weak- 
unhappy Ellena had not been left long to her ness so contemptible. The consciousness of 
own reflections, when the abbess appeared — deserving well shall recall my presence of 
a stately lady, apparently occupied with mind, which, permitting me to estimate the 
opinions of her own importance, and pre- characters of my oppressors by their actions, 
pared to receive her guest with rigour and will enable me also to despise their power." 
supercilious haughtiness. This abbess, who " I must remind you," said the abbess, at 
was herself a woman of some distinction, length, " that the questions you make are un- 
believed that of all possible crimes, next to becoming in your situation ; and that con- 
that of sacrilege, offences against persons of trition and humility are the best extenuations 
rank were least pardonable. It is not sur- of error. You may withdraw." 
prising, therefore, that, supposing Ellena, a "Most true," replied Ellena, bowing with 
young woman of no family, to have sought dignity to the superior ; " and I most wil- 
clandestinely to unite herself with the noble lingly resign them to my oppressors." 
house of Vivaldi, she should feel for her not Ellena forbore to make further inquiry or 
only disdain, but indignation, and that she remonstrance ; and perceiving that resistance 
should readily consent not only to punish would not only be useless, but degrading, 
the offender, but, at the same time, to afford she immediately obeyed the mandate of the 
means of preserving the ancient dignity of the abbess, determined, since she must suffer, to 
offended. suffer, if possible, with firmness and dignity. 

" I understand," said the abbess, on whose She was conducted from the parlour by the 

appearance the alarmed Ellena had arisen, recluse who had admitted her, and as she 

"I understand," said she, without making passed through the refectory where the nuns, 

any signal for her tp be seated, " that you are just returned from vespers, were assembled, 

tiie young person who is arrived from Naples, " their inquisitive glances, their smiles and busy 

" My name is Ellena di Rosalba," said her whispers told her that she was not only an 

auditor, recovering some degree of courage object of curiosity, but of suspicion; and that 

from the manner which was designed to de- little sympathy could be expected from hearts 

press her. which even the offices of hourly devotion had 

" I know nothing of your name," replied not purified from the malignant envy that 

the superior ; " I am informed only that you taught them to exalt themselves upon the hu- 

are sent here to acqtdre a knowledge of your* miliation of others, 



•••%. 



34 THE ITALIAN. 

The little room to whidi EUona was led, Poor Elleoa perceived that she conld not 

and where, to her great satisfaction, she was obey the dictates of a laudable pride without 

left alone, rather deserved the denomination such opposition from her heart as she had 

of a cell than of a chamber ; since, like those never experienced before. Her affections 

of the nuns, it had only one small lattice, and were now too deeply eng^ed to permit her 

a mattress, one chair, and a table, with a cm- to act with 6rmness, at the price of long- 

cifix and a prayer-book, were all its furniture, suffering. The consideration of resigning 

Ellena, as she surveyed her melancholy habi- Vivaldi was so very grievous that she could 

tadon, suppressed a rising sigh, but she could scarcely endure to pause upon it for a 

dot remain unaffected by recollections, which, moment ; yet, on the other hand, when she 

on this view of her altered state, crowded to thought of his family, it appeared that slie 

iKsr mind ; nor think of Vivaldi &r away, never could consent to make a part of it. She 

perhaps for ever, and, probably, even igno- would have blamed the erroneous judgment 

rtmt of her destination, without bitter tears, of Signora Bianchi, whose persuasions had 

But she dried them, as the idea of the Mar- so much assisted in reducing her to the 

chesa obtruded on her thoughts, for other present alternative, had not Uie tenderness 

ettiotions than those of grief possessed her. with which she cherished her memory ren- 

It was to the Marchesa that she especially dered this impossible. All that now remained 

attributed her present situation ; and it now for her was to endeavour patiently to endure 

appeared that the family of Vivaldi had not present evils, which she could not conquer ; 

Ibieen reluctant only, but positively averse to a for, to forsake Vivaldi at the price of liberty, 

(iOnnection with hers, contrary to a suggestion should liberty be offered to her on such terms, 

of Signora Bianchi, who had represented or to accept him in defiance of honourable 

that it might be supposed only, from their pride, should he ever effect her release, ap- 

known character, that they would disapprove peared to her distracted thoughts almost 

of the alliance, but of course be reconciled to equally impracticable. But as the probability 

'an event which their haughtiest displeasure pf his never beiag able to discover her abode 

ilever could revoke. This discovery of their returned to her consideration, the anguish she 

absolute rejection awakened all the proper suffered showed how much more she dreaded 

pride which the mistaken prudence of her to lose than to accept Vivaldi, and that love 

at^t and her affection for Vivaldi had lulled was, after all, the most powerful affection of 

to rest : and she now suffered the most abute her heart. 

Vexation and remorse for having yielded her ■ ■ 

cons^t to enter clandestinely into any fami]^. CHAPTER VTT 

The imaginary honours of so noWe an alliance ^n^r ihk. vii, 

vanished when the tem^s of obtaining them "YT'IVALDI, meanwhile ignorant of what 

were considered ; and now that the sound ^ bad occurred at Villa Altieri, repaired, 

inihd of Ellena was left to its own judg- as he had purposed, to Paluzzi, attended by 

ment, she looked with infinitely more pride his servant Paulo. It was deep night before 

and preference upon the industrious means he left Naples, and so an^qious was he to con- 

Ifrhich had hitherto rendered her independent^ ceal himself from observation, that though 

ihaoa. On all distinction which might be reluc- F^ulo carried a torch, he did not permit it to 

tantlr given. The consciousness of worth, be lighted till after he should have remained 

whicn had supported her in the presence of some time within the archway, thinking it 

the superior, b^[an to falter. " Her accusa- most prudent to watch a while in secret for 

lion was partly just 1 " said Ellena, •* and I his unknown adviser, before he proceeded to 

deserve punishment, since I could even for examine the. fort. 

& jfibihent Submit to the humiliation of con- His attendant, Paulo, was a true Neapoli- 
Mhtihg to an alliance which I knew would be tan— shrewd, inquisitive, insinuating, adroit ; 
unwillingly conferred. But it is not yet too possessing much of the spirit of intrigue, 
Ulte to rfetrieve my own esteem by asserting together with a considerable portion of hu- 
my independence, and resigning Vivaldi for mour, which displayed itself, not so much in 
ever, fey resigning him 1 by abandoning him words, as in his manner and countenance, in 
'fiYiO loves me — abandoning him to misery 1 the archness of his dark, penetrating eye, and 
Hlna whorti I cannot think of without tears, — in the exquisite adaptation of his gesture to 
to whotB my TOWS have been given, — who may his idea. He was a distinguished favourite 
claim me by the sacred remembrance of my with his master, who, if he had not humour 
dying friend, — him to whom my whole heart himself, had a keen relish' of it in others, and 
is devoted 1 Oh, miserable alternative 1 — ^that who certainly did possess wit, with all its 
I can no longer act justly, but at the expense lively accompaniments, in an eminent degree. 
Ofall my future happmessl Justly 1 and would Vivaldi had been won by the «d!i"z/p// and 
it then be just to abandon him who is willing humour of this man, to allow him an un- 
to resign everything for me, -^-abandon him to usual degree of familiarity in conversation ; 
ceaseless sotroW that the prejudices of his and, as they now walked together towards 
family may be gratified?" Paluz&k he tinfolded to Paulo as much of 



THE ITALIAN, 



3S 



his former adventure there as he judged 
necessary to hiterest his curiosity and excite 
his vigilance. The relation did both, Paulo, 
however, naturally courageous, was incredu- 
lous to superstition of any kind ; and, having 
quickly perceived that his master was not 
^together indisposed to attribute to a super- 
natural cause the extraordinary occurrences at 
Paluzzi, he began, in his manner, to rally 
him. But Vi^di was not in a temper to 
endure jesting ; his mood was grave, even to 
solemnity, and he yielded, thougn reluctantly, 
to the awe which at intervals returned upon 
him with the force of a magical spell, binding 
up all his faculties to sternness, and fixing 
them in expectation. While he was nearly 
regardless oi defence against human agency, 
his servant was, however, preparing for that 
alone, and very properly represented the im- 
prudence of going to Paluszi in darkness. 
Vivaldi observed that they could not watch 
for the monk otherwise than in darlmess, 
since the torch which lighted them would also 
warn him, and he had very particular rea- 
sons for watching before he proceeded to 
examine. He added that after a certain 
time had elapsed the torch might be lighted 
at a ndghbouring cottage. Paulo objected 
that, In the meanwhile, the person for whom 
they watched might escape ; and Vivaldi 
compromised the ai&ir. The torch was 
lighted, but concealed within a hollow of the 
clifife that bordered the road ; and the sen- 
tinels took their station in darkness within 
the deep arch, near the spot where Vivaldi 
had watdied with Bonarmo. As they did 
this, the distant chime of a convent informed 
Vivaldi that midnight was turned. The 
sound recalled to his mind the words of Sche- 
doni concerning the vicinity of the convent 
of the Black Piniitnts to Palnszi, and he 
asked Paulo whether this was the chime of 
that oonvent. Paulo rq>lied that it was, and 
that a remarkable circumstance had taught 
him to remember the Santa deli Pianto or 
Our Lady of Tiars, ''The place, signor, 
would interest you," said Paulo, "for there 
are some odd stories told of it ; and I am 
inclined to think that this unknown monk 
must be one of that society, his conduct is 
so strange." 

'* You believe, then, that I am willing to 
give faith to wonderful stories," said Vivaldi, 
smiling. " But what have you heard that 
is so extraordinary respecting this convent? 
Speak low, or we may be discovered." 

" Whv, signor, the story is net generally 
known, siUd Paulo, in a whisper. '* I half 
promised never to reveal it." 

•' If you are under any promise of secrecy," 
interrupted Vivaldi, " I forbid you to tell this 
wonderful tale, which, however, seems some- 
what too big to rest within your brain." 

'^Hie story would fain expand itself to 
youti* sigiioir*" said Paulo ; ** and, as I did 



not absolutely promise to conceal it, I am 
very willing to tell it." 

"Proceed, tlien," said Vivaldi ; "but let 
me once more caution you to speak low." 

" You are obeyed, signor. Yon must 
know, then, maeilro, that it was on the eve 
of the festival of Samlo Afatro, and about six 
yearssince— — " 

" Peace I " said Vivaldi. They were silent; 
but everything remaining still. Paulo, after 
some time, ventured to proceed, though in a 
yet lower whisper. "It was on the eve of 
the Sanlo Mareo, and when the last bell had 

rung, that a person ** He stopped again, 

for a rustling sound passed near him. 

" You are too late," said a sudden voice 
beside Vivaldi, who instantly recognised the 
thrilling accents of the monk. '* It is past 
midnight ; she departed an hour ago. Look 
to your steps ! " 

Though thrilled by this well-known voice, 
Vivaldi scarcely yidded to hb feelings for a 
moment, but, checking the questton which 
would have ashed " V/ho departed ? " he, by 
a sudden spring, endeavoured to seise the 
intruder, wnile Paulo, in the first hurry of 
his alarm, fired a pistol, and then hastened 
for the torch. So certainly did Vivaldi be- 
lieve himself to have leaped upon the spot 
whence the voice proceeded that, on reach- 
ing it, he instantly extended his arms, and, 
searching around, expected every moment to 
find his enemy in his grasp. Darkness again 
baffled his atterrl^t. 

"You are known," cried Vivaldi ; "vou 
shall see me at the Santa dell Pianto f What, 
ho I Paulo, the torch I— the torch I" 

Paulo, swift as the wind, appeared with it. 
" He passed up those steps in the rode, 
signor ; I saw the skirts of his garments 
ascending ! " 

•* Follow me, then," said Vivaldi, mounting 
the steps. "Away, away, -maestro f^^ re- 
joined Paulo, impatiently; "but, for Heaven's 
sake, name noniore the convent of the^aitA? 
dell Pianto ; our lives may answer it ! " 

He followed to the terrace above, where 
Vivaldi, holding high the torch, looked round 
for the monk. The place, however, as feu: as 
his eye could penetrate, was forsaken and 
silent. The glare of the torch enlightened 
only the rude walls of the citadd, somepoints 
of the cliff below, and some tall pines that 
waved over them, leaving in doubtful gloom 
many a recess of the ruin, and many ^ 
tangled thicket that spread among the rocks 
beyond. 

"Do you perceive any person, Paulo?" 
said Vivaldi, waving the torch fn the air to 
rouse the flame. 

" Among those archeq on the left, signor, 
those arches t^at stand duskily beyond the 
citadel, I thought I saw a shadowy sort of a 
figure pass. He might be a ghost, by Kis^ 
suence, for aughl I knoN^f, maestro *, \so!l\» 



36 THE ITALIAN. 

seems to have a good mortal instinct in takiog a quicker pace, making signs only to Paulo 
care of himself, and to have as swift a pair to follow and be vigilant. The passage ter- 
of heels to assist in carrying him off as any minated in a staircase that seemed to lead to 
lazaro in Naples need desire." vaults below. Vivaldi remembered the light 

" Fewer words, and more caution 1 " said which had formerly appeared there ; and, as 
Viveddi, lowering tibe torch, and pointing it recollections of the past gathered on bis 
towards the quarter which Paulo had men- mind, he faltered in his purpose, 
tioned. " Be vigilant, and tread lightly." Again he paused, looked back upon Paulo, 

*'You are obeyed, signor; but their eyes but was once more going forwEUxl, when 
will inform them, though their ears refuse, Paulo himself seized him by the arm. "Stop! 
while we hold a light to our own steps." signor/' said he in a low voice. '* Do you 

"Peace with this buffoonery I " said not distinguish a figure standing yonder in 
Vivaldi, somewhat sternly ; " follow in silence, the gloom ? " 
and be on your guard." Vivaldi, looking forward, perceived, indis- 

Paulo submitted, and they proceeded to- tinctly, something as of human form, but 
wards the range of arches which communi- motioiUess and silent. It stood at the du^y 
cated with the building, whose singular extremity of the avenue, near the staircase, 
structure had formerly arrested the attention Its garments, if garments they were, were 
of Bonarmo, and whence Vivaldi himself had dark ; but its whole figure was so faintly 
returned with such unexpected precipitancy traced to the eye, that it was impossible to 
and consternation. ascertain whether this was the monk. Viv- 

On perceiving the place he was approach- aldi took the light, and held it forward, 
ing he suddenly stopped, and Paulo, observ- endeavouring to distinguish the object before 
ing his agitation, and probably not relishing he ventured further ; but the inquiry was 
the adventure, endeavoured to dissuade him useless, and, resigning the torch to raulo, 
from fiuther research. "For we know not he rushed on. When he reached the head 
who may inhabit this gloomy place, signor, of the staircase, however, the form, whatever 
or their numbers, and we are only two of us it might be, was gone. Vivaldi had heard no 
after all. Besides, signor. it was through that footstep. Paulo pointed out the exact spot 
door, yonder," and he pointed to the very spot where it had stood, but no vestige of it ap- 
whence Vivaldi had formerly issued, ' ' through peared. Vivaldi called loudly upon the monk, 
that door that I fancied just now I saw but he heard only the lengthening echoes of 
something pass." bis own voice revolving among the chambers 

"Are you certain as to this?" said Viv- below ; and, after hesitating a while on the 
aldi, with increased emotion. " What was head of the stairs, he descended, 
its form? " Paulo had not followed down many steps 

"It was so dusky thereabouts, maestro ^ when he called out, "It is there, signor ; 
that I could not distinguish." I see it again ! and now it flits away through 

Vivaldi's eyes were fixed upon the building, the door that opens to the vaults ! " 
and a violent conflict of feeling seemed to Vivaldi pursued so swiftly that Paulo could 
shake his soul. A few seconds decided it. scarcely follow fast enough with the light; 
"I will go on," said he, "and terminate, at and as at length he rested to take breath, 
any hazard, this state of intolerable anxiety, he perceived himself in the same spacious 
Paulo, pause a moment, and consider well chamber to which he had formerly descended, 
whether you can depend on your courage, At this moment Paulo observed his counte- 
for it may be severely tried. If you can, nance change. " You are ill, signor," said he. 
descend with me in silence, and I warn you " In the name of our holy saint, let us quit 
to be wary ; if you cannot, I will go alone." this hideous place ! Its inhabitants can be 

" It is too late now, signor, to ask myself nothing good, and no good can come of our 
that question," replied Paulo, with a submis- remaining here." 

siveair; "andif I had not settled it long ago, Vivaldi made no reply; he drew breath 
I should not have followed you thus far. My with difficulty, and his eyes remained fixed on 
courage, signor, you never doubted before." the groimd, till a noise, like the creaking of 

" Come on then," said Vivaldi. He drew a heavy hinge, rose in a distant part of the 
his sword, and, entering the narrow doorway, vault. Paulo turned his eyes, at the same 
the torch, which he had now resigned to instant, towards the place whence it came, 
Paulo, showed a stone passage, that was, and they both perceived a door in the wall 
however, interminable to the eye. slowly opened and immediately closed again, 

As they proceeded, Paulo observed that the as if the person within had feared to be dis- 
walls were stained in several places with what covered. Each believed, from the transient 
appeared to be blood, but prudently forbore view he had of it, that this was the same 
to point this out to his master, observing the figure which had appeared on the staircase, 
Stnct injunction of silence he had received. and that it was the monk himself. Reani- 

VJKaldJ stuped cautiously, and often mated by this belief, Vivaldi's nerves were 
i^iisedto JisteD, after wbick be went qr with instantly iebiaicQd,aAjl be sprang to the door. 



THE ITAUAN. 



37 



which was unfiastened, and yielded imme- 
diately to his impetuous hand. "You shall 
not deceive me now," cried he, as he entered ; 
" Paulo, keep guard at the door 1 " 

He looked round the second vault in which 
he now found himself, but no person ap- 
peared ; he examined the place, and par- 
ticularly the walls, vnthout discovering anv 
aperture, either of door or window, by whicn 
the figure could have quitted the cliamber ; 
a strongly-grated casement, placed near the 
roof, was all that admitted air, and probably 
light. Vivaldi was astonished 1 '* Have you 
seen anything pass? " said he to Paulo. 

** Nothing, maestro" replied the servant. 

"This is almost incredible," exclaimed 
V\S2^, " 'Tis certain this form can be no- 
thing hmnan I " 

"If so, signor," observed Paulo, "why 
should it fear us ? as surely it does ; or why 
should it have fled?" 

" That is not so certain," rejoined Vivaldi ; 
" it may have fled only to lead us into evil. 
But bring hither the torch ; here is something 
in the wall which I would examine." 

Paulo obeyed. It was merely a ruggedness 
in the stones, not the partition of a door, that 
had excited his curiosity. "This is inexpli- 
cable 1 " exclaimed Vivaldi, after a long pause. 
" What motive could any human being have 
for thus tormenting me?" 

"Or any being superhuman, either, my 
signor? " said Pamo. 

" I am warned of evils that await me," 
continued Vivaldi, musing ; "of events that 
are r^ularly ftilfiUed ; the being who warns 
me crosses my path perpetually, yet, vdth 
the ctmning of a demon, as constantly eludes 
my grasp, and baffles my pursuit ! It is in- 
comprehensible by what means he |^lides thus 
away from my eye, and fades, as if into air, 
at my approach 1 He is repeatedly in my 
presence, yet is never to be found ! " 

"It is most true, signor," said Paulo, 
" that he is never to be foimd, and therefore 
let me entreat you to give up the pursuit 
This place is enough to make one believe 
in the horrors of purgatory I Let us go, 
signor." 

"What but spirit could have quitted this 
vault so mysteriously ?" continued Vivaldi, not 
attending to Paulo. ' * What but spirit ' ' 

*'I woiUd fain prove," said the servant, 
" that substance can quit it as easily ; I 
would fain evaporate through that door my- 
self." 

He had scarcely spoken the words when 
the door closed with a thundering clap that 
echoed through all the vaults. Vivaldi and 
Paulo stood for a moment aghast, and then 
both hastened to open it, and to leave the 
place. Their consternation may be easily 
conceived when they found that all their 
efforts at the door were ineffectual The 
thick wood w^ vM^ wiib S9Ud iws QfirQu, 



and was of such unconquerable strength that 
it evidently guarded what had l>een designed 
for a prison, and appeared to be the keep or 
dungeon of the ancient fort. 

"Ah, signor mio/" said Paulo, "if this 
was a spirit, 'tis plain he knew we were not 
so, by his luring us hither. Would we could 
exchange natures with him for a moment ; 
for I know not how, as mere mortal men, wu 
can ever squeeze ourselves out of this scrape. 
You must allow, maestrot that this was not 
one of the evils he warned you of ; or, if he 
did, it was through my organs, for I entreated 
you " 

" Peace, good Signor Bufo I " said Vivaldi. 
"A truce with this nonsense, and assist in 
searching for some means of escape." 

Vivaldi again examined the walls, and as 
unsuccessfully as before ; but in one corner 
of the vault lay an object which seemed to 
tell the fate of one who had been confined 
here, and to hint his own : it was a garment 
covered with blood. Vivaldi and his servant 
discovered it at the same instant ; and a 
dreadful foreboding of their own destiny fixed 
them, for some moments, to the spot. Vivaldi 
first recovered himself, when, instead of yield- 
ing to despondency, all his faculties were 
aroused to devise some means for escaping ; 
but Paulo's hopes seemed buried beneath the 
dreadful vestments upon which he still gazed. 
'* Ah, my signor 1 " said he, at length, in a 
faltering accent, " who shall dare to raise that 
garment? What if it should conceal the 
mangled body whose blood has stained it ? " 

Vivsddi shudderingly turned to look on it 
again. 

" It moves ! " exclaimed Paulo. ' ' I see it 
move I " as he said which, he started to the 
opposite side of the chamber. Vivaldi stepped 
a few paces back, and as quickly returned ; 
when, determined to know the event at once, 
he raised the garment upon the point of his 
sword, and perceived, beneath, other remains 
of dress, heaped high together, while even 
the floor below was stained with gore. 

Bdieving that fear had deceived the eyes 
of Paulo, Vivaldi watched this horrible spec- 
tacle for some time, but without perceivin^^ 
the least motion ; when he became convinced 
that not any remains of life were shrouded 
beneath it, and that it contained only articles 
of dress which had belonged to some unfor- 
tunate person who had probably been decoyed 
hither for plunder, and afterwards murdered. 
This belief, and the repugnance he felt to 
dwell upon the spectacle, prevented him from 
examining further, and he turned away to a 
remote part of the vault. A conviction of 
his own fate, and of his servant's, filled his 
mind for a while with despair. It appeared 
that he had been ensnared by robbers ; till, an 
he recollected the circumstaxiic^ ^\C\Ocv \NaA. 
attended his entiaoLce^ «tii^\5aftSfcN^\?iX^<»i&»x 



38 THE ITALIAN, 

conjecture seemed highly improbable. It sheet for us. maestro f or was it one for the 
was unreasonable that robbers should have body he inhabited while on earth ? " 
taken the trouble to decoy, when they might '• Neither, I trust," replied Vivaldi, endea- 
at first have seized him ; still more so that vouring to command tlie perturbation he 
they would have persevered so long in the suffered, and turning from the spectacle, 
attempt ; and most of all, that when he had " therefore we will txy onoe more to regain 
formerly been in their power, they should have oar liberty. " 

neglected their opportunity, and suffered him This was a design, however, beyond bis 
to leave the ruin unmolested. Yet granting accomplishment ; and, having again attacked 
that all this, improbable as it was, were, how- the door, raised Paulo to the grated window, 
ever, possible, the solemn warnings and pre- and vociferated for release with bis utmost 
dictions of the monk, so frequently delivered strength, in which he was very ably seconded 
and so faithfully fulfilled, could have no con- by Paulo, he abandoned for the present all 
nection with the schemes of banditti. It ap- further attempts, and, weary and desponding, 
peared, therefore, that Vivaldi was not in the threw himself on the ground of the dungeon, 
handsof robbers; or, if he were, that the monk, Paulo bitterly lamented his master's rash- 
at least, had no connection with them ; yet ness in penetrating to this remote ^|K>t, 
it was certain that he had just heard the and bewailed the probability of their being 
voice of this monk beneath the arch ; that famished. 

his servant had said he saw the vestments of *' For, supposing, signor, that we were not 
one ascending the steps of the fort ; and that decoyed hither for plunder and butchery, and 
they had both reason afterward to believe it supposing we are not surrounded by mali- 
was his shadowy figure which they had pur- cious spirits— which San Januarius forbid I 
sued to the very chamber where they were should take upon me to affirm is impossible f 
now confined. —supposing all this, signor, yet still there re- 

As Vivaldi considered all these circum- mains almost a certainty of our being starved 
stances, his perplexity increased, and he to death ; for how is it possible that anybody 
was more than ever inclined to believe that can hear our cries in a place so remote from 
the form which had assumed the appear- all resort, and buried, as ohe may say, under- 
ance of a monk was something superhu- ground, as this is ? " 
man. "Thou art an excellent comforter," said 

'• If this being had appeared only" said Vivaldi, groaning, 
he to himself, "I should, perhaps, hav* "You must allow, signor, that you are 
thought it the perturbed spirit of him who even with me," replied Paulo, " and that you 
doubtless has been murdered here, and that are as excellent a conductor." 
it led me hither to discover the deed, that his Vivaldi gave no answer, but lay on the 
bones might be removed to holy ground ; but ground, abandoned to agonising thought, 
this monk, or whatever it is, was neither silent He had now leisure to consider the late 
nor apparently anxious concerning himself; he words of the monk, and to conjecture, for he 
spoke only of events connected with my peace, was in a mood for conjecturing the worst, 
and predicted of the future, as well as reverted that they not only alluded to Ellena, but that 
to the past. If he had either hinted of himself his saying " she had departed an hour ago," 
or had been wholly silent, his appearance was a figurative manner of telling that she 
and manner of eluding pursuit are so extra- had died then. This was a conjecture which 
ordinary that I should have yielded for dispelled almost all apprehension for himself, 
once, perhaps, to the tales of our grand- He started from the ground, and paced his 
fathers, and thought he was the spectre of a prison with quick and unequal steps ; it was 
murdered person." now no longer a heavy despondency that op- 

As Vivaldi expressed his incredulity, how- pressed him, but an acute anxiety that stung 
ever, he returned to examine the garment him, and, with the tortures of suspense, 
once more, when, as he raised it, he ob- brought also those of passionate impatience 
served, what had before escaped his no- and horror concerning the fate of Ellena. 
tice, black drapery mingled with the heap The longer he dwelt upon the possibility of 
beneath ; and, on lifting this also wiih the her death^ the more probable it appeared, 
point of his sword, he perceived part of the This monk had already forewarned him of 
habilinjcnt of a monk ! He started at the the death of Bianchi ; and when he recol- 
discovery as if he had seen the apparition lected the suspicious circumstances which 
which had so long been tempting his ere- had attended ft, his terrors for Ellena in- 
dulity. Here were the vest and scapulary, creased. The moie he jrielded to his feelings, 
rent and stained with blood ! Having gazed the more violent they became, till, at length, 
for a moment, he let them drop upon the his ungovernable impatience and apprehension 
heap, when Paulo, who bad been silently arose almost to frenzy, 
observing him, exclaimed : Paulo foi^t, for a while, his own situation 

"Signor 1 that should be thegannent of the in the supenor sufferings of his master, and 
demon w/20 led as bitber. Is It a Handing- now, at least, endeavoured to perforrti the 



THE TTAUAS. 



39 



offioei of a comforter, for his tried to calnk sometimes go there to consult with (he grand 
Vivaldi's mind by selteting the fairest cir- penitentiary what is to be done. Now it 
cumstances for hope which the subject ad- happened that Father Ansaldo, the grand 
mitted, and he passed without noticing, or, if penitentiary himself, was in the chair, as is 
noticing, only lightly touched upon, the most customary on the vigil of the Santo Marco t 
prominent possibilities of evil. His master, and he gently reproved the penitent fur be- 
however, was insensible to all he said, till he wailing so loud, and bade him take comfort ; 
mentioned again the Convent deU Pianto ; when the other replied only by a groan deeper 
and this subject, as it seemed connected with than before, but it was not so loud, and then 
the monk, Who hsul hiikted the fate of EUena, proceeded to confess. Hut what he did con- 
interested the unhappy Vivaldi, who with- fess, signor, I know not ; for the confessor, 
drfiw awhile from his own reflections to you know, never must divulge, except, in- 
listen to a recital wUch might assist his con- deed, on very extraordinary occisions. It 
jectuies. was, however, something so very strange and 

Baulo complied with his oommaad. but not horrible that the grand penitentiary suddenly 

without reluctance. He looked round the quitted the chair, and Ixiforc Xvt reached the 

empty vault, as if he fiaared that some person cloisters he fell into strong convulsions. On 

might be lurking in the obscurity who would recovering himself, he asknl the people about 

overhear and even answer him. hini whether the penitent who had visited 

" We are tolerably retired here, too, s!g- such a confessional, naming it, was gone ; 
nor,'* said be, recollecting himself; "one adding, that if he was still in the church it 
may venttu^ to talk secrets with little danger was proper he should be dctain«l. He dc- 
of behig discovered. However, maestro, it is scribed, at the same time, as well as he could, 
best to make matters quite sure ; and, there- the sort of figure he had dimly seen approach- 
fore, if you win please to take a seat on the ing the confessional just before he had re- 
fx)und, I will stand beside you and relate all ceived the confession, at recollecting which 
know of the convent of Our Lady of Tears, he seemed ready to go off again into his con- 
which is not much alter all." vulsions. One of the fatliers, who had crossed 

Vivaldi having seated himself and bidden the aisle, on his way to the cloisters, upon the 
Panlo do the same, the servant began in a first alarm of Ansaldo's disorder, remembered 
low voice — "Itwason thevigiiof JS^^M^or^^, that a person such as was described had 
just after the last vesper-bell had tolled— you passed him hastily. He had seen a tall 
TiGvef^tete^A Santa Maria dell Pianto.sigiiart figure, muffled up in the habit of a white 
or you would know what a gloomy old church friar, ghding swiftly along the ai&le, towards 
it has — it was In a confessional in one of the the door which opened into the outer court of 
side aisles of this church, and just after the the convent ; but he was himself too much 
last bdl had ceased, that a person, cn) muffled engaged to notice the stranger particularly. 
up that neither face nor shape could l)e distin- Father Ansaldo thought this must be the per- 
guishedfCamie and placed himself on the steps son; and the porter was siunmoned, and 
of one of the boxes adjoining the confessional asked whether he had observed such a one 
chair ; but if he had beeii as airily dr^sed as pass. He affirmed that he had not seen any 
yourself, signor, he might havebeenjust as well person go forth from the gate within the last 
eontiealed;!br that dusky aisle is lighted only quarter of an hotu: ; which might be true 
by one lamp, which hangs at the end next enough, you know, signor, if the rogue had 
WA i>ainted window, except when the tapers been off his post. But he further said that 
at the shrine of San Antonio happen to be no one had entered, during the whole even- 
burning at the other extremity, and even then ing, habited in white, as the stranger was 
the place !s almost as gloomy as this vault, described to be : so the porter proved him- 
Bttt that is, no doubt, contrived for the pur- self to be a vigilant watchman ; for he must 
^ose that people niay hot blush for the sins have been fast asleep too, or how could this 
they confess ; and, in good faith, this is an personage have entered the convent, and left 



it again, without being seen by him ? " 

•• In white, was he?" said Vivaldi. " If 
he had been in blade, I should have thought 
this must have been the monk, my tor- 
mentor." 

*' Why, you know, signor, that occuired to 
me before," observed Paulo; "and a tiian 
The stranger knelt down upon them, and for might easily change his dress^ if that were 
tome time pcAired such groans into the ear all." 
of the toiUeitodr as were heard all along the " Proceed," said Vivaldi. 
aiaie. You at« to know, signor, that the "Hearing this account fcom\h& v^x\<«r 
brothers of thA Sania dell Pianto are of the continued Paulo, " l\i<e i^xYiecs \y^<e<i«^. ^yc^!^ 
<K<te of BUUk PtHiimU; and people who and all, that the sXxocQsec tuu^ \^%e(stex^ 
taut itfM iUi am tuMkuj i» confta within the waUs* «ttithtQa&svei0it^^«<«^sn 



accommodation which may bring more money 
to tbe poor4>ox, for the monks have a shrewd 
eye that way, and " 

" You hav« dropped the thread of your 
St6ry,"said^valdi. 

"True, signor, let me recollect where I 
lost it~oh I at the steps of the confessional. 



•^-N 



40 



THB ITAUAN. 



piut of the precincts, Was searched ; but no 
[person was found 1 " 

•• This must certainly be the monki" said 
Vivaldi, " notwithstanding the difference of 
his habit ; there surely cannot be two beings 
in the world who would conduct themselves 
in this same mysterious manner I " 

Vivaldi was interrupted by a low sound, 
which seined, to his distracted fancy, to pro- 
ceed from a dying person. Paulo also heard 
it ; he started, and they both listened with 
intense and almost intolerable expectation. 

"Ahl" said Paulo, at length, '*it was 
only the wind." 

"It was no more, " said Vivaldi ; * ' proceed 
therefore." 

•** From the period of this strange confes- 
sion," resumed Paulo, "Father Ansaldo was 
never properly himself, he " 

" Doubtless the crime confessed related to 
himself," observed Vivaldi. 

' ' Why, no, signcH*, I never heard that that 
was the case ; and some remarkable circum- 
stances which followed seemed to prove it 
otherwise. About a month after the time I 
have mentioned, on the evening of a sultry 
day, when the monks were retiring from the 
last service " 

"Hark!" cried Vivaldi. 

" I hear whispers," said Paulo, whispering 
himself. 

** Be still ! " said Vivaldi. * 

They listened attentively, and heard a 
murmuring, as of voices ; but could not as- 
certain whether they came from the adjoining 
vault, or arose from beneath the one in which 
they were. The sound returned at intervals ; 
and the persons who conversed, whatever 
they were, seemingly restrained their voices, 
as if they feared to be heard. 'VHvaldi con- 
sidered whether it were better to discover 
himself, and call for assistance, or to remain 
still. 

" Remember, signor," said Paulo, "what 
a chance we have of being starved, unless 
we venture to discover ourselves to these 
people, or whatever they are." 

" Venture ! " exclaimed Vivaldi. " What 
has such a wretch as I to do with fear 1 Oh, 
EUena, Ellenal" 

He instantly called loudly to the persons 
whom he believed he had heard, and was 
seconded by Paulo ; but their continued 
vociferations availed them nothing ; no 
answer was returned ; and twca the indistinct 
sounds which had awakened their attention 
were heard no more. 

At length, exhausted by their efforts, they 
laid down on the floor of the dungeon, 
abandoning all other attempts at escape till 
the morning light might assist them. 

Vivaidi had no further spirits to inquire for 
the remainder of Paulo's narrative. Ahnost 
despairing for himself, he could not fed an 
interest conoemiDg sttwigeri; for he had 



already perceived that it could not afford hidi 
information connected with EUena ; and 
Paulo, who had roared himself hoarse, was 
very willing to be silent 



CHAPTER VIII. 

DURING several days after EUena's 
arrival at the monastery of San Stefano 
she was not permitted to leave her room. 
The door was locked upon her, and not any 
person appeared except a nun, who brought 
her a scanty portion of food, and who was 
the same that had first admitted her into that 
part of the convent appropriated to the 
abbess. . 

On the fourth day, when, probably, it was 
believed that her spirits were subdued by 
confinement, and by her experience of the 
suffering she had to expect from resistance, 
she was summoned to the parlour. The 
abbess was alone, and the air of austerity 
with which she regarded EUena prepared 
the latter to endure. 

After an exordium on the heinousness of 
her offence, and the necessity there was 
for taking measures to protect the peace 
and dignity of a noble famUy, which her late, 
conduct had nearly destroyed, the superior 
informed her that she must determine either 
to accept the vefl, or the person whom the 
Marchesa di Vivaldi had, of her great good- 
ness, selected for her husband. 

"You never can be sufficiently grateful/* 
added the abbess, "for the generosity the 
Marchesa displays in aUowing you a dhoice 
on the subject. After the injury you have 
endeavoured to inflict upon her and her 
family, you could not expect tiiat any in- 
dulgence would be shown you. It was 
natural to suppose that the Marchesa would 
have punished you with severity ; instead of 
which, she aUows you to enter into our society; 
or, if you have not strength of mind 
sufficient to enable you to renounce a sinful 
world, she permits you to return into it, and 
gives you a suitabte partner to support you 
through its cares and toils, — a partner much 
more according with your circumstances than 
him to whom you had the temerity to lift 
your eye." 

EUena blushed at this coarse appeal to her 
pride, and persevered in a disdainful silence. 
Thus to give to injustice the colouring of 
mercy, and to acts most absolutely tyrannical 
the softening tints of generosity, excited her 
honest indignation. She was not, however, 
shocked by a discovery of the designs formed 
against her, since, from the moment of hex 
arrival at San Stefano, she had expected 
something terribly severe, and had prepared 
her mind to meet it with fortitude ; for she 
believed that, so supported* she should 
weary the malice of her enemies, and finally 
triumph over miafortuntb It was only wh^ 



»♦■ 



THB ITAUAN. 41 

ahe thought of Vivaldi that her courage failed, of her cruelty and oppression. She wot the 

and that the injuries she endured seemed too more satisfied with herself because she had 

beavv to be long sustained. never, for an instant, forgotten her own dig- 

"YOU are silent," said the abbess, after a nity so far as to degenerate into the vebc- 

pause of expectation. "Is it possible, then, mence of passion, or to falter with the weak- 

that you can be ungrateful for the generosity ness of fear. Her conviction of the abbess's 

of the Marchesa? But, though you may at unworthy character was too clear to allow 

present be insensible to her goodness, I will Ellena to feel abashed in her presence ; for 

forbear to take advantage of this insensibility, she regarded only the censure of the good, 

and will still allow you liberty of choice, to which she had ever been as tremblingly 

You may retire to your chamber, to consider alive as she was obdurately insensible to thai 

and to decide. But remember that you must of the vicious. 

abide by the determination you shall avow ; Ellena, having now asserted her resolutions, 

and that you will be allowed no appeal from determined to avoid, if possible, all repeti- 

the alternatives which are now placed before tions of scenes like the l^t, and to repel, by 

you. If you reject the veil, you must accept silence only, whatever indignity might be 

the husband who is offered you." offered her. She knew that she must suffer, 

"It is unnecessary," said Ellena, with an and she resolved to endure. Of the three 

air of dignified tranquillity, "that I should evils which were placed before her, that of 

withdraw for the purposes of considering and confinement, with all its melancholy accom- 

deciding. My resolution is already taken, paniments, appeared considerably less severe 

and I reject each of the offered alternatives, than either the threatened marriage or a 

I will neither condemn myself to a cloister, formal renunciation of the world ; either of 

or to the degradation with which I am threat- which would devote her, during life, to 

ened on the other hand. Having said this, misery, and that by her own act. Her choice, 

I am prepared to meet whatever suffering therefore, had been easy, and the way was 

you shall inflict upon me ; but be assured plain before her. If she could support with 

that my own voice never shall sanction the calmness the hardships which she could not 

evilsto which I may be subjected, and that the avoid, half their weight would be unfelt ; 

immortal love of justice, which fills all my and she now most strenuously endeavoured to 

heart, will sustain my courage no less power- attain the strength of mind which was neces- 

fiilly than the sense of what is due to my own sar^ for the practice of such equanimity, 

character. You are now acquainted with my For several days after the late interview 

sentiments and my resolutions ; I shall re- with the abbess she was kept a dose pii- 

peat them no more." soner ; but on the fifth evening she was per- 

The abb^is, whose surprise had thus long mitted to attend vespers. As she walked 

suffered Ellena to speak, still fixed upon her through the garden to the chapel, the ordi- 

a stem regard, as she said, " Where is it that nary freshness of the open air and the vcr- 

you haveleamed these heroics, and acquired dure of the trees and shrubs were luxuries 

the rashness which thus prompts you to avow to her who had so long been restricted from 

them ? — the boldness which enables you to the blessings of nature. She followed the 

insult your superior, a priestess of yoTir holy nuns to a chapel where they usually per- 

religion, even in her sanctuary I " formed their religious duties, and was there 

"The sanctuary is profaned," said El- seated among the novices. The solemnity 

lena, mildly, but with dignity : "it is become of the service, and particularly of those parts 

a prison. It is only when the superior ceases which were accompanied by music, touched 

to respect the precepts of that holy religion, all her heart, and soothed and elevated her 

the precepts which teach her justice and spirit. 

benevoloice, that she herself is no longer Among the voices of the choir was one 

respected. The very sentiment which bids whose expression immediately fixed her alten- 

us revere its mild and beneficent laws, bids us tion ; it seemed to speak a loftier sentiment 

also reject the violators of them : when you of devotion than the others, and to be modu- 

command me to reverence my religion, you lated by the melancholy of a heart that had 

urge me to condemn yourself. long since taken leave of this world. Whether 

"Withdraw ! " said the abbess, rising im- it swelled with the high peal of the organ, or 
patiently from her chair ; "your admonition, mingled in low and trembling accents with 
so becomingly delivered, shall not be for- the sinking chorus, Ellena felt that she under- 
gotten." stood all the feelings of the breast from which 

Ellena willingly obeyed, and was led back it flowed ; and she looked to the p^allery 

to her cdi; where she sat down pensively, where the sisters were assembled, to discover 

and reviewed her conduct. Her judgment a countenance that might seem to accord 

approved of the frankness with which she had with the sensibility expressed in the voice. 

asserted her rights, and of the firmness with As no strangers were admitted to the chapel, 

which she had reproved a woman who had some of the devotees had thrown back their 

' ' to d^nand respect figm the veiy victim veils, fuid slic saw little that interested her ii\ 



ITAUAN. 



fhdr various £ue8 ; but the figure and atti- 
tude of a nun, kneeling in a remqte part of 
the gallery, beneath a lamp which threw its 
rays aslant her head, perfectly agreed with 
the idea she had formed of the singer, and 
the sound seemed to approach immediately 
from that direction. Her face was concealed 
by a black veil, whose transparency, however, 
permitted the fairness of her complexion to 
appear; but the air of her head and the 
singularity of her attitude, for she was the 
only person who remain^ kneeling, suffi- 
ciently indicated the superior degree of fer- 
vency and penitence which the voice had 
expressed. 

When the h3rmn had ceased she rose from 
her knees, and Ellena, soon after, observing 
her throw back her veil, discovered, by the 
lamp, which shed its full light upon her fea- 
tures, a countenance that instantly confirmed 
her conjecture. It was touched with a melan- 
choly und of resignation ; yet grief seemed 
still to occasion the paleness and the air of 
languor that prevailed over it, and which dis- 
appeared only when the momentary energy 
of devotion seemed to lift her spirit above 
this world, and to impart to it somewhat of a 
seraphic grandeur. At those moments her 
blue eyes were raised towards Heaven with 
such meek, yet fervent love, such sublime en- 
thusiasm as the heads of Guido sometimes 
display, and which renewed with Ellena all 
the enchanting effect of the v<wce she had 
just heard. 

While she regarded the nun with a degree 
of interest which rendered her insensible to 
every other object in the chapel, she fancied 
she could perceive the calmness in her coun- 
tenance to be that of despair, rather than of 
resignation ; for, when her thoughts were not 
elevated in prayer, there was frequently a 
fixedness in her look too energetic for com- 
mon suffering, or for the temper of mind 
which may lead to i)erfect resignation. It 
had, however, much that attached the sym- 
pathy of Ellena, and much that seemea to 
speak a similarity of feeling. Ellena was not 
only soothed, but in some degree comforted, 
while she gazed upon her ; a selfishness which 
may, perhaps, be pardoned, when it is con- 
sidered that she thus knew there was one 
human being, at least, in the convent who 
must l)e capable of feeling pity and willing 
to administer consolation. Ellena endea- 
voured to meet her eye, that she might inform 
her of the regard she had inspired, and 
express hep own unhappiness ; but the recluse 
was so entirely devoted that she did not 
succeed. 

As they left the chapel, however, the sister 

passed close by Ellena, who threw back her 

veil and fixed upon her a look so supplicating 

and expressive that the nun paused, and in 

Aer turn re£rarded the novice, not with 4ui^ 

/vise oaljr, but with « aubctun of etirf oal^ tad 



compassion. A faint blush crossed her dketk, 
her spirits seemed to felter, and she was tqi- 
willing to withdraw her eyes from BUena: 
but it was necessaty that she should continue 
in the proe^on, and, bidding her farewdl 
by a smile of ineffable pity, she passed on to 
the court, while Ellena followed with atten- 
tion still fixed upon the ijiun, who soon dis- 
appeared beyond the doorway of the abbess's 
apartment, and 'Ellena had nearly reached 
her own before her thoughts were sufficiently 
disengaged to permit her to inquire the name 
of the stranger. 

"It is sister Olivia whom yoi\ mean^ per- 
haps," said her conductress. 

** She is very handsome," said Helena. 

" Many of the sisters are so,*' replied Mar- 
garitone, with an air of pique. 

"Undoubtedly," said Ellena; "but she 
whom I mean has a most touching counte- 
nance—frank, noble, and full of sensibility ; 
and there is a gentle melancholy in her eye 
which cannot hut interest all who observe 
her." 

Ellena was so [fascinated by this interest- 
ing nun that she forgot she was describing 
her to a person whose callous heart rendered 
her insensible to the Influence of any counte- 
nance except, perhaps, the commanding one 
of the lady aboess, and to whom, therefore, 
a description of the fine traits which Ellena 
felt, was as unintelligible as would have been 
an Arabic inscription. 

•• She is past the bloom of youth," con- 
tinued Ellena, still anxious to be understood ; 
"but she retains all its interesting graces, and 
adds to them the dignity of 

*' If you mean that sne is of middle age,** 
interrupted Margaritone, peevishly, "it is 
sister Olivia yoii mention, for we are all 
younger than she is." 

Ellena, raising her eyes almost uncon- 
sciously as the Tjim spoke this, fixed them 
upon a face sallow, meagre, seemingly near 
fifty years an inhabitant of this wonci ; and 
she could scarcely conceal the surprise she 
felt on perceiving such wretched vanity lin- 
gering among the chilled passions of so re- 
pulsive a frame, and within the sequestered 
shade of a cloister. Margaritone, still jealous 
of the praise bestowed on Olivia, repelled all 
further inquiry, and having attended Ellena 
to her cell locked her up for the night. 

On the following evening Ellena was again 
permitted to attend vespers, and, on the way 
to the chapel, the hope of seeing her interest- 
ing favourite reanimated her spirits. In the 
same part of the gallery as on the preceding 
night she again appeared, and kneeling as 
before beneath the lamp in private orison, for 
the service was not begun. 

Ellena endeavoured to subdue the impa- 
tience she fSelt to express her regard and tQ 
be noticed by the hply sister till she should 
haye fiahhoA Wbsn titc aua lose «ad op* 



THE ITALIAN. 43 

served Ellena, she lifted ber veil, and, fixing "Hush!" said the nun, cxprcssivelv ; 

on her the same inquiring eye, her counte- "no more; I may be observed. Goodnight, 

nance brightened into a smile so full of com- my sister ; may your slumbers be light ! " 
passion and intelligence that Ellena, for- Ellena's heart sank. She had not spirits 

getting the decorum of the place, left her seat to say " Good night ! " but her eyes, covered 

to approach her ; it seemed as if the soul with tears, said more. The nun turned her 

which beamed forth in that smile had long own away suddenly, and pressing her hantl 

been acquainted with hers. As she advanced^ in silence, left the cell. Ellena, firm and 

the nun dropped her veil, a reproof which tranquil under the insults of the abl^css, w<is 

she immediately understood, and she with- now melted into tears by the kindness of a 

drew to her seal : but her attention remained friend. These gentle tears were refreshing 

fixed on the recluse during the whole ser- to her long-oppressed spirits, ami she indulged 

vice. them. Of Vivaldi she thought with more 

At the conclusion, wheti they left the chapel, composure than she had done since she left 

and she saw Olivia pass without noticing her, Altieri ; and something like hope bc^an to 

EUena could scarcely restrain her tears ; she revive in her heart, though reflection offered 

returned in deep dejection to her room. The little to support it. 

regard of this nun was not only delightful, On the following morning, she perceived 
but seemed necessary to her heart, and she that the door of her cell had not been closed, 
dwelt, with fond perseverance, on the smile She rose impatiently, and, not without a hope 
that had expressed so much, and which threw of liberty, immediately passed it. The cell, 
onegleamof comfort even through the bars of opening upon a short passage, which com- 
ber prison. municated with the main building, and which 

Her reverie was soon interrupted by alight was shut up by a door, was secluded, and 

step that approached ner cell, and in the next almost insulated from every other chamber ; 

moment the door was unlocked, and Olivia and this door being now secured Ellena was 

herself appeared. Ellena rose with emotion as truly a prisoner as before. It appeared, 

to meet her ; the ntm held forth her hand to then, that the nun had omitted to fast*rn the 

receive here. cellonlv for the purpose of allowing her the 

"You are unused to confinement," said convenience of walking in the passage, and 

she, mournfully, and placing on the table a she was grateful for the attention. Still more 

llttte basket containing refreshment, "and she was so, when, having traversed it, she 

our hard fare " perceived one extremity terminate in a narrow 

"I understand you," said Ellena, with a staircase that appeared to lead to other 

look expressive of her gratitude. " You have chambers. 

a heart that can pity, though you inhabit She ascended the winding steps hastily, and 

these walls; you have suffered too, and found they led only to a door, opening into a 

know the delicate generosity of softening the small room, where nothing remarkable ap- 

sorrows of others by anv attention that may peared till she approached the windows, and 

tell them your sympathy. Oh! if I could beheld thence a horizon, and a landscape 

express how mudi the sense of this affects spread below, whose grandeur awakened all 

me ! " . her heart. The consciousness of her prison 

Tears interrupted her. Olivia pressed her was lost while her eyes ranged over the wide 

hand, looked steadily upon her face, and and really sublime scene without. She per- 

was somewhat agitated ; but she soon re- ceived that this chamber was within a small 

covered apparent tranquillity, and said, with turret, projecting from an angle of the con- 

a serious smUe. "You judge rightly, my vent over the walls, and suspended, as in air, 

sister, respecting my sentiments, however above the vast precipices of granite that 

you may err concerning my sufferings. My formed part of the mountain. These preci- 

neart is not insensible to pity, nor to you, my pices were broken into cliffs, which, in some 

child. You were designed for happier days places, impended far above their base, and 

than you may hope to find within these in others rose, in nearly perpendicular lines, 

cloisters." to the walb of the monastery, which they 

She checked herself, as if she had allowed supported. Ellena, with a dreadfnl p'easure, 

too much, and then added, " But you may, looked down them, shagged as they were with 

perhaps, be peaceful ; and since it consoles larch, and frequently darkened by lines of 

you to know that you have a friend near you, gigantic pine bending along the rocky ledjjes, 

believe me that fi^end— but believe it in till her eye rested on the thick chestnut woods 

silence. I will visit you when I am permitted that extended over their winding base, and 

—but do not inquire for me ; and if my visits which, softening to the plains, seemed to 

are short, do not press me to lengthen form a gradation between the variegated cul- 

thcm." tivation there and the a^nMmXA.tvRsSkcASiws. 

" M<w good this is 1 " said EUena, in a rodcs above. Rovo&idL liJ^s^ esXsjMsivH^ ^-ivw^ 

trennddus wrfce, "How sweat too it isl w«tetum\Aed\\itmo>m\»2ff!a,o^N%:ev^^^Ms.v^ 

flonwmrMtme,BndIumpttkdhytotx\'* and ft\t\\xidft, iiYiiidbk ^SL«bj^ ^^smw^ 



44 THE ITALIAN. 

approach to San Stefano ; some shaded with fast she had brought, left the rootiii the door 
forests of olive and almond trees, but the of which she did not forget to secure. Thus 
greater part abandoned to the flocks, which EUena was at once deprived of so innocent a 
in summer feed on their aromatic heii>age, means of consolation as her pleasant turret 
iind on the approach of winter descend to had promised. 

the sheltered plains of the Tavogliere di During several days she only saw the austere 
Puglia, nun, except when she attended vespers ; where. 

On the left opened the dreadful defile which however, she was so vigilantly observed that 
she had traversed, and the thunder of whose she feared to speak with Olivia, even by her 
waters now murmured at a distance. The eyes. Olivia's were often fixed upon her face, 
accumulation of ovenopping points, which and with a kind of expression which EUena, 
the mountains of this dark perspective exhi- when she did venture to look at her, could 
bited, presented an image of grandeur supe- not perfectly interpret. It was not only of 
rior to anything she had seen while within the pity, but of anxious curiosity, and of some- 
pass itself. thing also like fear. A blush would sometimes 

To Ellena, whose mind was capable ofbeing wander over her cheek, which was succeeded 
highly elevated or sweetly soothed by scenes by an extreme paleness, and by an air of such 
of nature, the discovery of this little turret universal languor as precedes a fainting fit : 
was an important circumstance. Hither she but the exercises of devotion seemed fre- 
oould come, and her soul, refreshed by the quently to recall her fleeting spirits, and to 
\'iews it aflbrded, would acquire strength to elevate them with hope and courage. 
l)ear her with equanimity through the perse- When she left the chapel Ellena saw Olivia 
cations that might await her. Here, gazing no more that night ; but on the following 
upon the stupendous imagery around her, morning she came with breakfast to the 
looking as it were beyond the awful veil which cell. A character of peculiar sadness was on 
obscures the features of the Deity, and con- her brow. 

ccals him from the eyes of his creatures — "Oh! how glad I am to see you," said 
dwelling as with a present God in the midst Ellena ; " and how much I have regretted 
of his sublime works — with a mind thus ele- your long absence I I was obliged to remem- 
vated, how insignificant would appear to her ber constantly what you had enjoined, to for- 
Ihe transactions, and the sufferings of the bear inquiring after you." 
world ! How poor, too, the boasted power The nun replied with a melancholy smile, 
of man, when the fall of a single cliff from " I come in obedience to our lady abbess," 
these mountains would with ease destroy said she, as she seated herself on Ellena's 
thousands of his race assembled on the plains mattress. 

below 1 How would it avail them that they "And did you not wish to come?" said 
were accoutred for battle, armed with all the Ellena, mournfully. 

instruments of destruction that human inven- " I did wish it," replied Olivia ; " but " 

tion ever fashioned? Thus man, the giant and she hesitated. 

who held her in captivity, would shrink to the " Whence then this reluctance ? " inquired 

diminutiveness of a fairy; and she would ex- Ellena. 

perience that his utmost force was unable to Olivia was silent a mom^ent. 

enchain her soul, or compel her to fear him, " You are a messenger of evil news ! " said 

while he was destitute of virtue. Ellena. "You are only reluctant to afflict 

Ellena's attention was recalled from the me." 
scene without by a sound from the gallery "It is as you say," rejoined the nun; "I 
below, and she then heard a key turning in am only reluctant to afflict you ; and I fear 
the door of the passage. Fearing that it was you have too many atuchments to the world 
sister Margaritone who approached, and to allow you to receive, without sorrow, what 
who, informed by her absence of the consola- I have to communicate. I am ordered to 
lory turret she had discovered, would per- jjrepare you for the vows, and to say that, 
haps debar her from ever rettuning to it, since you have rejected the husband which 
Ellena descended with a palpitating heart, was proposed to you, you are to accept the 
and found that nun in the cell. Surprise and veil ; that many of the customary forms are 
severity were on her countenance when she to be dispensed with ; and that the ceremony 
inquired by what means she had unclosed the of taking the black veil will follow without 
door, and whither she had been. delay that of receiving the white one." 

Ellena answered, without any prevarication. The nun paused, and Ellena said, "You 
that she had found the door unfastened, and are an imwilling bearer of this cruel message ; 
that she had visited the turret above ; but she and I reply only to the lady abbess, when I 
forbore to express a wish to return thither, declare that I never will accept either ; that 
judging that such an expression would force may send me to the altar, but that it 
certahAy exclude her in future. Maigaritone, never shall compel me to utter vows which 
^/ier sharply rebuking ber for prying beyond my heart abhors ; and if I am constrained to 
//7ff passage^ and having set down the bre^kr appear there, it daaXl be oulj to ijtotest a^^unst 



THE ITALIAN. 



45 



her tyranny, and against the form intended to 
sanction it." 

To Olivia this answer was so far from being 
displeasing that it appeared to give her satis- 
faction. * 

" I dare not applaud yonr resolution," said 
she ; *• but I will not condemn it. You have, 
no doubt, connections in the world which 
would render a seclusion from it afflicting. 
You have rdations, friends, from whom it 
would be dreadhil to part ? " 

" I have neither," said Ellena, sighing. 

" No 1 Can that be possible ? and yet you 
are so unwilling to retire 1 " 

*• I have only one friend," replied Ellena, 
'* and it is of him they would deprive me ! " 

" Pardon, my love, the abruptness of these 
inquiries," said Olivia ; "yet, while I entreat 
your forgiveness, I am inclined to offend 
again, and to ask your name." 

"That is a question I will readily answer. 
My name is Ellena di Rosalba." 

" How ? " said the nun, with an air of de- 
liberation. " Ellena di " 

" Di Rosalba," repeated her companion. 
" And permit me to ask your motive for the 
inquiry : do you know any person of my 
name?" 

•• No," replied the sister, mournfully; "but 
your features have some resemblance to those 
of a friend I once had." 

As she spoke this, her agitation was appa- 
rent, and she rose to go. "I must not 
lengthen my visit, lest I should be forbidden 
to repeat it, " said she. " What answer shall 
I give to the abbess ? If you are determined 
to reject the veil, allow me to advise you to 
soften your refusal as much as possible. I 
am, perhaps, better acquainted with her cha- 
racter than you are ; and oh, my sister 1 I 
would not see you pining away your existence 
in this solitary cell." 

" How much I am obliged by the interest 
you express for my welfare," said Ellena, 
** and by the advice you offer ! I will yield 
my judgment in this instance to yours ; you 
shaU modulate my refusal as you think 
proper : but remember that it must be abso- 
lute, and beware lest the abbess should mis- 
take gentleness for irresolution." 

"Trust roe, I will be cautious in all that 
relates to you," said Olivia. •* Farewell ! I 
will visit you, if possible, in the evening. In 
the meantime the door shall be left open, that 
you may have more air and prospect than 
this cell affords. That staircase leads to a 
pleasant chamber." 

" I have visited it already," replied Ellena, 
"and have to thank you for the goodness 
which permitted me to do so. To go thither 
will gfreatly soothe my spirits ; if I had some 
books, and my drawing-instruments, I could 
almost forget my sorrows there." 

" Could you so ? " said the nun, with an 
affectionate smile^ "Adieu I I will endear 



vour to see you in the evening. If sister 
Margaritone returns, be careful not to inquire 
for me ; nor once ask her for the little indul- 
gence I give you." 

Olivia withdrew, and Ellena retired to the 
chamber above, where she lost for a while all 
sense of sorrow amidst the great scenery 
which its window exhibited. 

At noon the step of Margaritone sum- 
moned Ellena from her retreat, and she was 
surprised that no reproof followed this second 
discovery of her ataence. Margaritone only 
said that the abbess had the goodness to pep- 
mit Ellena to dine with the novices, and tliAt 
she came to conduct her to their table. 

Ellena did not rejoice in this permission, 
preferring to remain in her solitary turret to 
the being exposed to the examining eyes oif 
strangers; and she followed dejectedly 
through the silent passages to the apartment 
where they were assembled. Here she was 
not less surprised than embarrassed to ob- 
serve, in the manners of young people resid- 
ing in a convent, an absence of that decorum 
which includes bieneath its modest shade every 
grace that ought to adorn the female cha- 
racter, like the veil which gives dignity to 
their air and softness to their features. When 
Ellena entered the room, the eyes of the 
whole company were immediately fixed upon 
her ; the young ladies began to whisper and 
smile, and showed, by various means, that 
she was the subject of conversation, not 
otherwise than censorious. No one advanced 
to meet and to encourage her, to welcome 
her to the table, or displayed oi\e of those 
nameless graces with which a generous and 
delicate mind delights to reanimate the 
modest and the unfortunate. 

Ellena took a chair in silence, and, though 
she had at first felt forlorn and embarrassed 
by the impertinent manners of her com- 
panions, a consciousness of innocence gra- 
dually revived her spirits, and enabled her 
to resume an air of dignity which repressed 
this rude presumption. 

Ellena returned to her cell, for the first 
time, with eagerness. Margaritone did not 
fasten the door of it, but she was careful to 
secure that of the passage ; and even this 
small indulgence she seemed to allow with a 
surly reluctance, as if compelled to obey the 
command of a superior. The moment she 
was gone, Ellena withdrew to her pleasant 
turret, where, after having suffered from the 
coarse manners of the novices, her gratitude 
was the more lively when she perceived the 
delicate attention of her beloved nun. It 
appeared that she had visited the chamber in 
Ellena absence, and had caused to be brought 
thither a chair and a table, on which were 
placed some books and a knot of fragrant 
flowers. Ellena did not rev^ess \.\v& ^?&s5x^ 
tears which the geneiOMS it^\T\%^ ol 0\vvv8>. 
excited; and sh^loxbox^ ^ox ^QXftaxsvQi«v«\v& 



THE ITALIAI^. 



to examine the books, that the pleasing emo* 
tions shb experienced might not be inter- 
rupted. 

On looking into these books, however, she 
perceived that some of them treated of mys- 
tical subjects, which she laid aside with ais'> 
appointment ; but in others she observed a 
few of the best Italian poets, and a volume 
or two of Guicciardini's history. She was 
somewhat surprised that the poets should 
have found their way to the library of a nun, 
but was too much pleased with the dis- 
covery to dwell on the inquiry. 

Having arranged her books, and set her 
little room in order, she seated herself at a 
window, and, with a volume of Tasso, en- 
deavoured to banish every painful remem- 
brance from her mind. She continued wan- 
d^ng in the imaginary scenes of the poet 
till the fading light recsdled her to those of 
leality. The sun was set, but the mountain- 
tops were still lighted up by his beams, and 
a tint of glorious purple coloured all the 
west, and l^gan to change the snowy points 
on the horison. The silence and repose of 
the vast scene promoted the tender melan- 
tholjT thdt prevailed in her heart ; she thought 
Of Vivaldi, and wept— of Vivaldi, whom she 
might, perhaps, never see again, though she 
doubted not that he would be indefatigable 
in searching for her. Every particular of 
their last conversation, when he had so 
lamented the approaching separation, even 
while he allowed of its propriety, came to 
her mind ; and while she witnessed, in ima- 
gination, jthe grief and distraction which her 
mysterious departure and absence must have 
occasioned him, the fortitude with which she 
had resisted her own sufferings yielded to the 
picture of his. 

The vesper-bell at length summoned her to 
prepare for mass, and she descended to her 
cell to await the arrival of her conductress. 
It was Margaritone, who soon appeared ; 
but in the chapd she, as usual, saw Olivia, 
who, when the service had concluded, invited 
her into the garden of the convent. There, 
i^ she passed beneath the melancholy cedars 
that, ranged on either side the long walks, 
ibttned a majestic canopy, almost excluding 
the evening twilight, Olivia conversed with 
her on senous but general topics, carefully 
avoiding any mention of the abbess, and of 
the affairs of Ellena* The latter, anxious to 
learh the effect of her repeated objection to 
the veil, ventured to make some inquiries, 
which the nun immediat^y discouraged, and 
as cautiously checked the grateful effusions 
of her young friend for the attentions she had 
received. 

Olivia accompanied Ellena to her cell, and 

there no longer scrupled to relieve her from 

uncertainty. With a mixture of frankness 

a/jd discretion, she related as much of th* 

conversatk>n that bad passed belwe&x faetVdf 



and the abbess as it seemed necessary for 
Ellena to know, from which it appeared that 
the former was as obstinate as the latter was 
firm. 

' ' Whatever may be your resolution, " added 
the nun, *' I earnestly advise you, my sister, 
to allow the superior some hope of compli- 
ance, lest she proceed to extremities." 

"And what extremity can be more ter- 
rible," replied Ellena, " than either of those 
to which she would now urge me ? Why 
should I descend to practise dissimulation ? " 

•• To save yourself from undeserved suffer- 
ings," said Olivia, mournfully. 

" Yes, but I should then incur deserved 
ones," observed Ellena, "and forfeit such 
peace of mind as my oppressors never could 
restore to me." As she said this, she looked 
at the nun with an expression of gentle re- 
proach and disappointment. 

'* I applaud the justness of your sentiment, " 
replied Olivii, regarding her with tenderest 
compassion. " Alas ! that a mind so inge- 
nuous should be subjected to the power of 
injustice and depravity I '* 

"Not subjected," said EUena, with a noble 
pride ;" do not say subjected. I have accus- 
tomed myself to contemplate those suffer- 
ings ; I have chosen the least of such as were 
given to my choice, and I will endure them 
with fortitude ; and can you then say that I 
am subjected?" 

"Alas, my sister ! you know not what you 
promise," rejoined Olivia ; "you do not com- 
prehend the sufferings which may be pre^ 
paring for you." 

As she spoke her eyes filled with tears, and 
she withdrew them from EUena, who, sur- 
prised at the extreme concern on her coun- 
tenance, entreated she would explain herself. 

" I am not certain, myself, as to this 
point," added Olivia; "and if I were, I 
should not dare to explain it." 

" Not dare ! " repeated Ellena, mournfully. 
" Can benevolence like yours know fear when 
courage is necessary to prevent evil ?" 

" Inauire no further," said the nun ; but 
no blusn of conscious duplicity stained her 
cheek. " It is sufficient that you understand 
the consequence of open resistance to be ter- 
rible, and that you consent to avoid it." 

"But how avoid it, my beloved friend, 
without incurring a consequence which, in 
my apprehension, would be yet more dread- 
ful ? How avoid it, without either subjecting 
myself to a hateful marriage or accepting 
the vows ? Either of these events would be 
more terrible to me than anything with which 
I mav otherwise be menaced." 

' ' Perhaps not, " observed the nun. ' ' Ima- 

f' nation cannot draw the horrors of . 
ut, my sister, let me repeat that I would 
save you, oh ! how willingly save you, from 
the evils preparing ! and that the only chance 
xA doing so is by prevailing with you to 



THB ITALIAN, 47 

abandon at least the appearance of resist- penses her evening benediction. My absence 
A°c^6>" will be observed. Good-night, my sister. 

"Your lundness deeply affects me." said Reflect on what I have advised: and remem- 
Ellena; "and I am fearful of appearing insen- ber, I conjure you, to consider that the con- 
sible of it when I reject your advice ; yet I si^uence of your dediion must be solemn, 
cannot adopt it. The tciy dissimulation and may bentaL" 

which I should employ in sen-defence might The nun spoke this with a look and em- 
be a means of involving me in destruction." phasis so extraordinary that EUena at once 

As £llena concluded, and her eyes glanced wished and dreaded to know more ; but 
upon the nun, unaccountable suspicion oc- before she had recovered from ber sui^prisc 
curred to her that Olivia might be insincere, Olivia had left the room, 
and that, at this very moment, when she was 

advising dissimulation, she was endestvouring ■ 

to draw Ellena into some snare which the r>irAD-ri7D tv 

abbess had laid. She sickened at this dread- CMAlTEK IX. 

ful supposition, and dismissed it without 'T*HE adventurous Vivaldi and his servant 
suffering herself to examine its probability. -^ Paulo, «fter patting the night of Ellena's 
That Olivia, from whom she had receive so departure from Villa Altieri in one of the 
many attentions, whose countenance and subterraneous chambers of the fort of Paluzsi, 
manners annoimced so fisur a mind, and for and yielding, at length, to exhausted nature, 
whom she had conceived so much esteem and awoke in terror and utter darkness, for the 
affection, should be cruel and treacherous, flambeau had expired. When a recollection 
was a suspicion that gave her (nore pain than of the occurrences of the prec^ling evening 
the actual imprisonment in which she suffered ; returned, they renewed their eQiMis tor liberty 
and when she looked again upon her face, with ardour. The grated window was again 
Bllena was consoled by a dear conviction examined, and being found to overlook only 
that she was utterly incapable of perfidy. a confined court of the fortress, no hope 9^ 

"If it were possible Uiat I could consent peared of escaping. 
to practise deceit," resumed Ellena, after a The words of the monk returned with 
long pause, " what could it avail me ? I am Vivaldi's first recollections, tp torture him 
entirdy in the power of the abbess, who with apprehension that EUeoa wasno more; 
would soon put my sincerity to the proof and IHiulo, unable either to console or to 
when a discovery of my duplicity would only appease his master, sat down de^jectedly be- 
provoke her vengeance, and I should be side bin. Paulo had no longer a hope to 
punished even for having sought to avoid suggest or a joke to throw away ; and he 
injustice." could not forbou: seriously remarking that to 

" If deceit is at any time excusable," re- die of hunger was one of the most horrible 
plied Olivia, rductantly, ** it is when we prac- means of death, or lamenting the rashness 
tise it in self-defence. There are some rare which had made them liable to so sad a 
situations when it maybe resorted to without probability. 

our incurring ignominy, and yours is one He was in the midst of a very pathetic 
of those. But I will acknowledge, that all oration, of which, however, his master did 
the good I expect is from the delay which not hear a single word, so wholly was his 
temporising may procure you. The superior, attention engaged by his own melancholy 
when she understands there is a prolxibility thoughts, when on a sudden he became 
of obtaining your consent to her wishes, may silent, and then, starting to his feet, exclaimed, 
be willmg to allow you the usual time of pre- "Signer, what is yonder? Do you see 
paration for the veil, and meanwhile some- nothing ? " 
thing may occur to rescue you from your pre- Vivaldi looked round, 
sent situation." " It is certainly a ray of light," continued 

" Ah 1 could I but believe so ! " said Paulo ; **and I will soon know where it comes 
Ellena; *'but, alas! what power can rescue from." 

me ? And I have not one relative remaining As he said this he sprang forward, and his 
eveu to attempt my deliverance. To what surprise almost equalled his joy when he dis- 
possibility do you allude? " covered that the light issued through the door 

'•The Marchesa may relent." of the vault, which stood a little open. He 

*• Does, then, your possibility of good rest could scarcely believe his senses, since the 
with her, my dear friend ? If so, I am in door had been strongly fastened on the pre- 
despair again ; for such a chance of benefit, ceding night, and he had not heard its pon- 
there would certainly be little policy in for- derous bolts undrawn. He threw it widelv 
feiting one's integrity." open, but, recollecting himself, stopped to look 

" Tiiere are also other possibilities, my sis- into the adjoining vault before he ventured 
ter, " said Olivia; "but hark 1 what bellis that? forth ; when Vivaldi diaxVed ^^eax. Vvoi "aaDL^ 
It is the chime which assembles the auas in bidding h'vm foWovi Vvvm Vu%V.VDk)\i« ^a»«tw^^ 
the upartmwt of tb9 Mbbcsa, when aht db- to the day. Th« coq]^ ^ >^ Vucx^a^ "W^^ 



48 THE ITALIAN. 

silent and vacant, and Vivaldi reached the her a prisoner. This was all the information 

archway^ without having observed a single she could give respecting Ellena. 

person, breathless with speed and scarcely Vivaldi, when he could think coolly, be- 

daring to believe he had regained his hberty. lieved he had discovered the instigators and 

Beneath the arch he stopped to recover the design of the whole aliair, and the cause 

breath, and to consider whether he should also of his late confinement. It appeared 

take the road to Naples or to Altieri, for that Ellena had been carried off by order of 

it was yet early morning, and at an hour his family, to prevent the intended marriage, 

when it appeared improbable that EUena's and that he had l)een decoyed into the fort of 

family would be risen. The apprehension of Paluzzi, and kept a prisoner there, to secure 

her death had vanished as Vivaldi's spirits him from interrupting the scheme, which his 

revived, which this pause of hesitation suffi- presence at the villa would effectually have 

ciently announced : but even this was the done. He had himself spoken of his former 

pause only of an instant ; a strong anxiety adventure at Paluzzi ; and it was now evident 

concerning her determined him to proceed to that his family had taken advantage of the 

Villa Altieri, notwithstanding the unsuitable- curiosity he had expressed to lead him into 

ness of the hour, since he could at least re- the vaults. The event of this design had 

connoitre her residence, and await till some been the more probable, since, as the fort lay 

sign of the family having arisen should in the direct road to Altieri, Vivaldi could not 

appear. go thither without being observed by the 

" Pray, signor," said Paulo, while his mas- creatures of the Marchesa, who, by an artful 
ter was deliberating, " do not let us stop manoeuviie, might make him their prisoner 
here, lest the enemy should appear again ; without employing violence, 
and do, signor, take the road which is nearest As he considered these circumstances, it 
to some house where we may get breakfast, appeared almost certain that father Schedoni 
for the fear of starving has taken such hold was in truth the monk who had so long 
upon me that it has nearly anticipated the haunted his steps ; that he was the secret ad- 
reality of it already." viser of his modier, and one of the authors of 

Vivaldi immediately departed for the villa, the predicted misfortunes which it seemed he 

Paulo, as he danced joyfully along, expressed possessed a too infallible means of fulfilling, 

all the astonishment that filled his mind as to Yet Vivaldi, while he admitted the probability 

the cause of their late imprisonment and of all this, reflected with new astonishment on 

escape ; but Vivaldi, who had now leisure to the conduct of Schedoni during his interview 

consider the subject, could not assist him in with him in the Marchesa's cabinet— the air 

explaining it. The only certain point was of dignified innocence with which he had re- 

that he had not been confined by robbers ; pressed accusation ; the apparent simplicity 

and what interest anyone could have in im- with which he had pointed out circumstances 

prisoning him for the night and suffering him respecting the stranger that seemed to make 

to escape in the morning did not appear. against himself ; and Vivaldi's opinion of the 

On entering the garden at Altieri he was confessor's duplicity began to waver. "Yet 

surprised to see that several of the lower what other person, ' said he, "could be so 

lattices were open at this early hour, but sur- intimately acquainted with my concerns, or 

prise changed to terror when, on reaching the have an interest sufficiently strong for thus 

portico, he heard a moaning of distress from indefatigably thwarting me, except this con- 

thehall, and when, after loudly calling, he was fessor, who is, no doubt, well rewarded for 

answered by the piteous cries of Beatrice, his perseverance? The monk can be no 

The hall-door was fastened, and Beatrice other than Schedoni ; yet it is strange that he 

being unable to open it, Vivaldi, followed by should have forborne to disguise his person, 

Paulo, sprang through one of the unclosed and should ai^>ear in this mysterious office in 

lattices ; when on reaching the hall he found the very habit he usually wears I " 

the housekeeper bound to a pillar, and learned Whatever might be the truth as to Sche- 

that Ellena had been carried off during the doni, it was evident that Ellena had been 

night by armed men. carried away by order of Vivaldi's family, 

For a moment he was almost stupefied by and he immediately returned towards Naples 

the shock of this intelligence, and then asked with an intention of demanding her at their 

Beatrice a thousand questions concerning the hands, not with any hope of their compliance, 

affair, without allowing her time to answer but believing that they might accidentally 

one of them. When, however, he had patience afford him some light on the subject. If, 

to listen, he learned that the ruffians were however, he should fail to obtain any hint 

four in number ; that they were masked ;'that that might assist him in tracing the route she 

two of them had carried Ellena through the had been carried, he determined to visit Sche- 

garden, while the others, after binding Beatrice doni, accuse him of perfidy, urge him to a 

to a pillar, threatening her with death if she full explanation of his conduct, and, if pos- 

made any noise^ and watching over her till sible, obtain from him a knowledge of £1- 

tAeir comrades bad secured met prize, left lena's pla9e of coufinement. 



THE ITALIAN. 49 

When at length he obtained an interview the brother, " but if yon cross the court« and 

with the March^, and, throwing himself at ascend that stfiircase which you see yonder 

lis feet, supplicated that Ellena might be beyond the doorway on your right, it wiU 

restored to her home, the unexpected surprise lead you to a gallery, and the third door you 

9f his father overwhelmed him with astonish- will come to is father Schedoni's." 

xient and despair. The look and manner of Vivaldi passed on without seeing another 

the Marchese could not be doubted ; Vivaldi human being, and not a sound disturbed the 

^vas convinced that he was absolutely ignorant silence of this sanctuary, till, as he ascended 

of any step that had been taken against Ellen, the stairs, a feeble note of lamentation pro- 

*' However ungraciously you have con- ceeded from the gallery, and he condudedit was 

ducted yourself," said the Marchese, "mv uttered by some penitent at confession, 

conduct towards you has never yet been sul- He st<^)ped, as he had been directed, at 

lied by duplicity ; however I mav have wished the third door, when, as he gently knocked, 

to break the imworthy connection you have the sound ceased, and the same profound 

formed, I should disdain to employ artifice silence returned. Vivaldi repeated his summons 

as the means. If you really design to marry but receiving no answer, he ventured to open 

this person, I shall make no other effort to the door. In the dusky cdl within no person 

prevent sudi a measure than by telling you appeared, but he still looked round, expecting 

the consequence you are to expect : from to discover someone in the dubious gloom, 

thenceforth I will disown you for my son." The chamber contained little more uian a 

- The Marchese quitted the apartment when mattress, a chair, a table, and a crucifix ; 

he had said this, and Vivaldi made no at- some books of devotion were upon the table, 

tempt to detain him. His words expressed one or two of which were written in unknown 

little more than they had formerly done, yet characters ; several instruments of torture 

Vivaldi was shocked by the absolute menace lay beside them. Vivaldi shuddered as he 

now ddivered. The stronger passion of his hastily examined these, though he did not 

heart, however, soon overcame their effect ; comprehend the manner of their application, 

and this moment, when heb^an to fear that and he left the chamber without noticing any 

he had irrecoverably lost the object of his other object, and returned to the court The 

dearest affections, was not the time in which porter said that since father Schedoni was not 

he could long feel remoter evils, or calculate in his cell, he was probably either in the 

the force of misfortunes which never might church or in the gardens/ for that he had not 

arrive.. The nearer interest pressed solely passed the gates during the morning, 

upon his mind, and he was conscious only to "Did he pass yester-evening?' said Vi- 

the loss of Ellena. valdi, eagerly. 

The interview which followed with his "Yes, he returned to vespers," replied the 

mother was of a different character from brother, with surprise, 

that which had occurred with the Marchese. "Are you certain as to that, my friend?" 

The keen dart of suspicion, however, sharp- rejoined Vivaldi. "Are you certain that he 

ened as it was by love and by despair, slept in the convent last night ?" 

pierced beyond the veil of her duplicity; " Who is it that asks the question?" said 

and Vivaldi as quickly detected her hypocrisy the lay brother, with displeasure ; " and what 

as he had yielded his conviction to the right has he to make it ? You are ignorant of 

sincerity of the Marchese. But his power the rules of our house, signor, or you would 

rested here : he possessed no means of perceive such questions to be unnecessary, 

awakening her pity or actuating her justice. Any member of our community is liable to be 

and could not obtain even a hint that might severely punished if he sleeps a night without 

guide him in his search of Ellena. these walls, and father Schedoni would be the 

Schedoni yet remained to be tried. Vivaldi last among us so to trespass. He is one of 
had no longer a doubt as to his having the most pious of the brotherhood ; few, in- 
caballed with the Marchesa, and that he had deed, have courage to imitate his severe ex- 
been an agent in removing Ellena. Whether, ample. His voluntary sufferings are sufficient 
however, he was the person who haunted the for a saint. He pass the night abroad ! Go, 
ruins of Paluzzi was still questionable ; for, signor ; yonder is the church ; you will find 
though several circumstances seemed to de- him there, perhaps." 

Clare in the affirmative, others not less Vivaldi did not linger to reply. "The 

plausible asserted the contrary. hypocrite ! " said he to himself as he crossed 

On leaving the Marchesa's apartment, to the church, which formed one side of the 

Vivaldi repaired to the convent of the Spirito quadrangle ; " but I will unmask him." 

Santo, and enquired for father Schedoni. The church which he entered was vacant 

The lay brother who opened the gate in- and silent, like the court. " Whither can the 

formed him that he was in his cell, and inhabitants of this place have withdrawn 

Vivaldi stepp^ impatiently into the court, themselves ? " said he. '• \N\iat^H^x \ ^gfi '^ 

requesting to be shown thither. hear only the ediQ^s ol mv oh^xl ^qicAsX^\!& \ >^ 

. ** I dm not leave the gatp, s(gnor/' said seems as U OyeaOi tdsoft^xAX^ v<«i ^« ^"^v 



S3 THE ITALIAN, 

perhaps it is one of the hours of general yourself, announce to all yoursociety the de- 
meditation, and the monks have only retired spicable artifices you have employed, and the 
to their cells." misery you have occ$(sioned. Your charac^^ 

As he paced the long Aisles he suddenly shall be announced siloud." 

stopped to catch the startling sound that miu^ While Vivaldi spoke the monk had with* 

mured through the lofty roof ; but it seemed drawn his eyes, and fi3(ed them again on the 

to be only tli^ closing of a distant door. Yet ground. His countenance had resumed its 

he often looked forw^ into the sacred gloom usual expression. 

which the painted windows threw over the "Wretch I restore to me Ellena di Ro- 

remote perspective, in the expectation of per- salba I " cried Vivaldi, wiUi the sudden an- 

ceiving a monk. He was not long disap- ^ish of renewed despair. " Tell me at least 

pointed ; a person appeared, standing silently where she may be found, or you shall be 

in an obscure part of the cloister clothed in compelled to do so. Whither— whither have 

the habit of this society, and he advanced you conveyed her ? " 

towards him. As he pronounced this in loud and pas- 

The monk did not avoid Vivaldi, or even sionate accents several ecclesiastics entered 

turn to observe who was approaching, but the cloisters, and were passing on to the body 

remained in the same attitude, fixed like a of the church, when his voice arrested their 

statue. This tall and gaimt figure had, at a attention. They paused, and perceiving the 

distance, reminded him of Schedoni, and singular attitude of Schedoni and the imntic 

Vivaldi, as he now looked under the cowl, gesticulations of Vivaldi, hastily advanced 

discovered the ghastly countenance of the towards them. '* Forbear I " said one of the 

confessor. strangers, as he seieed the cloak of Vivaldi. 

" Have I found you at last ?" said Vivaldi. " Do you not observe I " 

"I would speak with you, father, in private. "I observe a hypocrite," replied Vivaldi, 

This is not a proper place for such discourse stepping back and disengaging himself. " I 

as we must hold." observe a destroyer of the peace it was his 

Schedoni made no r^y, and Vivaldi, once duty to protect. I — r" 

again looking at him, observed that his fea- *' Forbear this desperate conduct," said the 

tures were fuced, and his eyes bent towards priest, " lest it provoke the just vengeance of 

the ground. The words ^ Vivaldi seemed Heaven I Do you not observe also the holy 

not to have reached his understanding, nor office in which he is engaged ? " pointing to 

even to have made any impression on his the monk. *' Leave the church while you are 

senses. permitted to do so in safety ; you suspect qot 

He repeated them in a louder tone, but the punishment you may provoke." 

still not a single line of Schedoni's counten- " I wiil not quit the spot till you answer my 

ance acknowledged their influence. *' What inquiries," said Vivaldi to Schedoni, without 

means this mummery ?" said he, his patience deigning even to look upon the priest, 

exhausted, and his indignation aroused. " Where, I repeat, is Ellena di Rosalba ? " 

" This wretched subterfuge shall not protect The confessor was still silent and unmoved, 

you ; you are detected : your stratagems are " This is beyond all patience, and all belief," 

known 1 Restore Ellena di Rosalba to her continued Vivaldi. *' Speak 1 Answer me, or 

home, or confess where you have concealed dread what I may unfold. Yet silent 1 Do 

her." you know the Convent del Piantof Do 

Schedoni was still silent and unmoved. A you know the confessional of the Black 

respect for his age and profession withheld PeuiUntsf" 

Vivaldi from seizing and compelling him to Vivaldi thought he perceived the counte- 

answer ; but the agony of impatience and nance of the monk suffer some change. "Do 

indignation which he suffered formed a strik- you remember that terrible night," he added, 

ing contrast to the death-like apathy of the " when, on the steps of that confessional a 

monk. " I now also know you," continued tale was told. " 

Vivaldi, " for my tormentor at Paluzzi, the Schedoni raised his eyes, and fixing them 

prophet of evils which you too well practised once more on Vivaldi with a loc^ that 

the means of fulfilling, the predictor of the seemed intended to strike him to the dvst, 

death of Siguora Bianchi." Schedoni frowned. " Avaunt ! " cried he in a tremendovs voice ; 

• • The forewarner of EUena's departure ; the "avaunt, sacrilegious boy 1 Tremble for the 

phantom who decoyed me into the dungeons consequence of thy desperate impiety I " 

of Paluzzi ; the prophet and the artificer of As he concluded he started from his posl- 

nll my misfortunes." tion, and gliding with the silent swiftness of 

The monk raised his eyes from the ground, a shadow along the cloister, vanished in an 

and fixed them with terrible expression upon instant. Vivaldi, when attempting to pursue 

Vivaldi, but was still silent. him, was seized by the surrounding monks. 

"Yes, father, "added Vivaldi, "I know and Insensible to his sufferings, an4 exasperated 

will proclaim you to the world. I will strip by his assertions, they threatened th»t if he did 

you of the holy bypoorii^ in which you shroua not immediate l«ave the eoovcnt he shottl4 



THB ITAUAN. jt 

be confined, and undergo the serere puni$h- In tiie cfening, restless and anxious for 

ment to which be had become liable for change, though scarcely knowing whither to 

kaving disturbed and even insulted one of bend his course, he left the palace and strolled 

iheir holy order while performing an act of down to the sea-bmch. A few fishermen and 

penance. laxzaroni only were loitering along the strand, 

*' He has need of such acts," said Vivaldi ; waiting for the boats fh)m St. lAicia. Vival- 

*'bat when can they restore the happiness di, with folded arms and his hat drawn over 

his titeachery has destroyed? Your order is his face to shade his sorrow from obscrvn- 

dfsgraced by such a member, reverend fathers ; tion, paced the edge of the waves, listening to 

yotor ** their murmur as they broke gently at his 

" Peace I " cried a monk ; " he is the pride feet, and gazing upon tneir undulating beauty. 

of our house ; he is severe in his devotion, while all consciousness was lost in melancholy 

and in sdf-punishment terrible beyond the reverie concerning Ellena. Her late rusidcncc 

reach of But I am throwing away my appeared at a distance rising over the shore. 

commeDdatiotts ; I am talking to one who is He remembered how often from thence they 

not permitted to value or to understand the had together viewed this lovely scene I Its 

sacred mysteries of our exercises." features had now k>st its clMirm ; they were 

"Away with him to the Padrt Ahbaiet" colourless and uninteresting, or impressed 

cried an enraged priest; "away with him to only mournful ideaSt The sea, fluctuating 

the dungeon I " beneath the setting svin, the long mole and 

"Away ! awayl " repeated his companions, its lighthouse tipp^ with the last rays, fishcr- 

andthenr endeavoured to force Vivaldi through men reposing in the shade, little boats skim- 

the clofaters. But with the sudden strength ming over the smooth waters, which their oars 

which pride and indignation lent him, he scarcely dimpled : these were images that 

burst from thehr united hold, and, quitting brought to his recollection the affecting even- 

the church by another door, escaped into the ing when he had last seen this picture from 

street. Villa Altieri, when, seated in the orangery 

Vivaldi returned home in a state of mind with EUena and Bianchi on the night pre- 

that would have engaged the pity of any ceding the death of the latter, Ellena herself 

heart which prejudice or self-interest had had so solemnly been given to his care, and 

not hardened. lie avoided his father, but had so affectingly consented to the dying rc- 

Sougfat the Marchesa, who, however, trium- quest of her relative. The recollection of 

phant in the success of her plan, was still that scene came to Vivaldi with all the force 

msensible to the sufferings of her son. of contrast, and renewed all the anguish of 

When the Marehesa had been informed of despair ; he paced the beach wiih quicker 

his approaching marriage, she had, as usueU, steps, and long groans burst from his heart, 

consulted with her confessor on the means of He accused himself of indifference and in- 

preventing it, who had advised the scheme activity for having been thus long unable to 

she adopted, a scheme which was the more discover a single circumstance which might 

easily carried into effect, since the Marchesa direct his search ; and, though he knew not 

bad early in life been acquainted with the whither to go, he determined to leave Naples 

abbess of San Stefismo, and knew, therefore, immediately and return no more to his 

enough of her character and disposition to father's mansion till he should have rescued 

confide Without hesitation the management Ellena. 

of this important afi&ur to her discretion. Of some fishermen who were conversing 

The answer of the abbess to her proposal together upon the beach, he inquired 

was not merdy acquiescent but zealous, and Whether they could accommodate him with 

it appeared that she too faithfully justified the a boat, ia which he meant to coast the bay ; 

confidence placed in her. Af^er this plan for it appeared probable that Ellena had been 

had been so successfully prosecuted, it was conveyed from Altieri by water to some town 

not to be hoped that the Marchesa would be or convent on the shore, the privacy and 

prevailed upon to relmquish it by the tears, facility of such a mode of conveyance being 

the anguish, or all the varied sufferings of her suitable to the designs of her enemies. 

son. Vivaldi now reproved the easmess of "I have but one boat, signer," said a 

his own confidence in having hoped it, and fisherman, " and that is busy enough in going 

quitted her cabinet with a despondency that to and fro between here and Santa Lucia, but 

sdmost reached despair. my comrade, here, perfiaps can serve you. 

The faithful Paulo, when he obeyed the What, Carlo, can you help the signor to your 

hasty summons of his master, had not sue- little skiff? the other, I know, has enough to 

ceeded in obtaining intelligence of Ellena; do in the trade." 

and ^^valdi, having dismissed him again on His comrade, however, w&3 too much en- 

the same inquiiy, retired to his apartment, gaged with a party of three or four men, 

where the excess of grief, and a feeble hope who were listening in deep attention round 

of devising some successful mode of remedy, him, to reply. Vivaldi, advancing to urge 

alternately agitated and detained him. the question, was strode by the eagerness with 



s« 



THB ITALIAN. 



which he deUvered his nanative, as well as 
the unoouthoess of his gesticulation ; and he 
paused a moment in attention. One of the 
auditors seemed to doubt of something that 
had been asserted. " I tell you," replied the 
narrator, " I used to carry fish there two and 
three times a week, and very good s(»t of 
people they were ; they have laid out many a 
ducat with me in their time. But as I was 
saying, when I got there, and knocked upon 
the door, I h^rd, all of a sudden, a huge 
groaning, and presently I heard the voice of 
the old housekeeper herself roaring out for 
help ; but I could give her none, for the door 
was fastened; and, while I ran away for 
assistance to old Bartoli — ^>ou know old 
Bartoli, he lives by tlie road side as you go to 
Naples : well, while I ran to him, comes a 
signor, and jumps through the window and 
sets her at liberty at once. So then I heard 
the whole story " 

••What story?" sdd Vivaldi, '• and of 
whom do you speak? " 

*'A11 in good time, maestro, you shall 
hear," said the fisherman, who, looking at 
him for a moment, added, •'Why, signor, it 
should be you I saw there ; you should be 
the very signor that let old Beatrice loose." 

Vivaldi, who had scarcely doubted before 
that it was Altieri of which the man had 
spoken, now asked a thousand questions 
respecting the route the ruffians had taken 
Ellena, but obtained no relief to his anxiety, 

'•I should not wonder," said a lazzaro, 
who had been listening to the relation, •' I 
should not wonder if the carriage that passed 
Bracelli early on the same morning, with the 
blinds drawn up, though it was so hot that 
people could scarcely i:^the in the open air, 
should prove to be it which carried off the 
lady 1 " 

This hint was sufficient to reanimate Vi- 
valdi, who collected all the information the 
lazzaro could give, which was, however, little 
more than that a carriage, such as he 
described, had been seen by him driving 
furiously through Bracelli, early on the morn- 
ing mentioned as that of Signora di Rosalba's 
dej^arture. Vivaldi had now little doubt as 
to its being the one which conveyed her away, 
and he determined to set out immediately for 
that place, where he hoped to obtain from the 
postmaster further intelligence concerning 
the road she had pursued. 

With this intention he returned once more 
to his father's mansion, not to acquaint him 
with his purpose, or to bid him farewell, but 
to await the return of his servant Paulo, who 
he meamt should accompany him in the 
search. Vivaldi's spirits were now animated 
with hope, slender as were the circumstances 
that supported it ; and, believing his design 
to be wholly unsuspected by those who woiHd 
be disposed to interrupt it. he did not guard 
either against the measiures which might im- 



pede his departure from Naples, or those 
which might overtake him on his journey. 



CHAPTER X. 

THE Marchesa, alarmed at some bints 
dropped by Vivaldi in the late interview 
between them, and by some circumstances of 
his latter conduct, summoned her constant 
adviser, Schedoni. Still suffering with the 
insult he had received in the church of the 
Spirito Santo, he obeyed with sullen reluct- 
ance, yet not without a malicious hope of dis- 
covering some opportunity for retaliation. 
That insult, which had pointed forth his 
hypocrisy and ridiculed the solemn abstrac- 
tion he assumed, had sunk deep in his heart, 
and, fermenting the direst passions of his 
nature, he meditated a terrible revenge. It 
had subjected him to mortifications of various 
kinds. Ambition, it has already appeared, 
was one of his strongest motives of action, 
and he had long since assumed a character of 
severe sanctity, chiefly for the purposes of 
lifting him to promotion. He was not be- 
loved in the society of which he was a mem- 
ber ; and many of the brotherhood, who had 
laboured to disappoint his views and to detect 
his errors, who hated him for his pride and 
envied him for his reputed sanctity, now 
gloried in the mortification he had received, 
and endeavoured to turn the circumstance to 
their own advantage. They had not scrupled 
already to display by insinuation and pointed 
sneers their triumph, and to menace his repu- 
tation ; and Schedoni, though he deserved 
contempt, was not of a temper to endure it. 

But, above all, some hints respecting his 
past life which bad fallen from Vivaldi, and 
which occasioned him so abruptly to leave 
the church, alarmed him. So much terror, 
indeed, had they excited that it is not im- 
probable that he would have sealed his secret 
in death, devoting Vivaldi to the grave, had 
he not been restrained by the dreaded ven- 
geance of the Vivaldi family. Since that 
hour he had known no peace, and had never 
slept ; he had taken scarcely any food, and 
was almost continually on his knees upon the 
steps of the high altar. The devotees who 
beheld him paused and admired ; such of the 
brothers as disliked him sneered and passed 
on. Schedoni appeared alike insensible to 
each ; lost to this world, and preparing for a 
hirfier. 

The torments of his mind and the severe 
penance he had observed had produced a 
surprising change in his appearance, so that 
he resembled a spectre rather than a human 
being. His visage was wan and wasted, his 
eyes were sunk and become nearly motion- 
less, and his whole air and attitudes exhibited 
the wild energy of something not of this 
earth. 

When he was summoned by the Marchesa, 



THE ITAUAN. SS 

his consciebce whispered this to be the con- indeed, I should have endured patiently the 
sequence of circumstances which Vivaldi had indi^^nity which has been offered me, recdv- 

revealed, and at first he had determined ing it as a salutary mortification, as one of 

not to attend her ; but, considering that if it those inflictions that purify the soul from the 

was so his refusal would confirm suspicion, pride which even the holiest men may un- 

he resolved to trust once more to the subtlety consciously cherish. But I am no longer 

of his address for deliverance. permitted to consider mjself ; the public 

With these apprehensions, tempered by this good requires that an example should t>e 

hope, he entered the Marchesa's closet. She made of the horrible impiety of which your 

almost started on observing him, and could son — it grieves me, daugnter, to disclose it 1 

not immediately withdraw her eyes from his —your son, unworthy of such a mother, has 

altered visage, while Schedoni was unable been guiltv." 

wholly to conceal the perturbation which It is evident that in the stvle, at least, of 

such earnest observation occasioned. " Peace this accusation, Schedoni suilfered the force 

rest with you, daughter 1" said he, and he of his resentment to prevail over the usual 

seated himself, without lifting his eyes fix>m subtlety of his address, the deep and smooth 

the floor. insinuation of his policy. 

" I wished to speak with you, father, upon " To what do you allude, righteous 

affahs of moment," said the Marchesa father ?" inquired the astonished Marchesa ; 

gravely, •* which are probably not unknown "what indignity, what impiety has my son 

to you." She paused, and Schedoni bowed to answer for? I entreat you will speak 

his head, awaiting in anxious expectation explicitly, that I may prove I can lose the 

what was to follow. mother in the strict severity of the judge." 

••You are silent, father," resumed the "That is spoken with the grandeur of sen- 

Marchesa. *' What am I to understand timent which has always distinguished you, 

by this?" my daughter! Strong minds perceive that 

"That you have been misinformed," re- justice is the highest of the moral attributes; 

plied Schedoni, whose apt conscience be- mercy is only the favourite of weak ones." 

trayed his discretion. Schedoni had a view in this commendation 

" Pardon me," said the Marchesa, " I am beyond that of confirming the Marchesa's 

too well informed, and should not have re- present resolution against Vivaldi. He wished 

quested your visit if any doubt had remained to prepare her for measures which might 

upon my mind." hereafter be necessary to accomplish the 

"Signora! be cautious of what you revenge he meditated, and he knew that by 

credit," said the confessor, imprudently ; flattering her vanity he was most likely to 

" you know not the consequences of a hasty succeed. He praised her, therefore, for 

credulity." qualities he wished her to possess, encouraged 

" Woi^d that mine were a rash credulity 1 " her to reject general opinions by admiring, as 

replied the Marchesa ; " but — we are be- the symptoms of a superior understanding, 

tray«l." the convenient morality upon which she hsul 

•* W^«ff" repeated the monk, beginning to occasionally acted; and, calling sternness 

revive. "What has happened?" justice, extolled that for strength of mind 

The Mardiesa informed him of Vivaldi's which was only callous insensibility, 

absence, and inferred from its length, for it He then described to her Vivaldi's late 

was now several days since his departure, that conduct in the church of the Spirito Santo, 

he had certainly discovered the place of exaggerated some offensive circimistances of 

EUena's confinement, as well as the authors it, invented others, and formed of the whole 

of it. an instance of monstrous impiety and unpro- 

Schedoni differed from her, but hinted that voked insult. 

the obedience of youth was hopeless unless The Marchesa listened to the relation with 

severer measures were adopted. no less indignation than surprise, and her 

"Severer I" exclaimed the Marchesa; readiness to adopt the confessor's advice 

"good fetiier, is it not severe enough to allowed him to depart with renovated spirits 

confine her for life? " and most triumphant hopes. 

'* I mean severer with respect to yomr son. Meanwhile, the Marchese remained igno- 
lady," replied Schedoni. '*When a young rant of the subject of the conference with 
man has so fer overcome all reverence for an Schedoni. His opinions had formerly been 
holy ordinance as publicly to insult its pro- sounded, and having been found decidedly 
fessor, and yet more, when that professor is against the dark policy it was thought expe- 
in the very performance of his duties, it is dient to practise, he was never afterwards 
time he should be controlled with a strong consulted respecting Vivaldi. Parental anxiety 
hand. I am not in the practice of advising and affection began to revive as the length- 
such measures, but the conduct of Signor ened absence ofhisson was observed. Though 
>^valdi is such as calls aloud for them, jealous of his rank, he loved Vivaldi ; and, 
P^Uc decency demands it For myself, though he had never positively believed that 



54 THE ITAUAM. 

he designed to enter into a secret engage- vaidi, who had Yisited several of these in 
ment with a person whom the Marchese oon- search of Ellena, had t)een surprised at the 
sidered to be so much his inferior as Elleoa, refined courtesT and hospitality with which 
\ie had suffered doubts which gave him con- he was received. 

siderable uneasiness. The present extraor- It was on the seventh day of his journey, 
dinary absence of Vivaldi renewed his alarm, and near sunset, that he was bewildered in 
He apprehended that if she was discovered at the woods of Rugieri, He had received a 
this moment, when the fear of losing her for direction for the road he was to take at a 
ever, and the exasperation which such com- village some leagues distant, and had obeyed 
plicated opposition occasioned, had awak- it confidently till now, when the path was lost 
ened all the passions of his son, this rash in several tracts that branched out among the 
young man might be prevailed upon to secure trees. The day was closing, and Vivaldi's 
her for his own by the indissoluble vow. On spirits began to fail, but Paulo, light of heart 
the other hand, he dreaded the effect of and ever gay, commended the shade and 
Vivaldi's despair should he fail in the pursuit ; pleasant freshness of the woods, and observed 
and thus, fearing at one moment that for that if his master did lose his way, and was 
which he wished in the next, the Marchese obliged to remain here for the night, it would 
suffered a tumult of mind inferior only to his not be so very unlucky, for they could climb 
son's. up among the branches of a chestnut-tree, and 

The instructions which he delivered to the find more neat and airy lodging than any inn 
servants whom he sent in pursuit of Vivaldi had yet afforded them, 
were given under such distraction of thought While Paulo was thus endeavouring to 
that scarcely any person perfectly understood make the best of what might happen, and his 
his commission ; and, as the Marchesa had master was sunk in a reverie, they suddenly 
been careful to conceal from him her know- heard the sound of instruments and voices 
ledge of EUena's abode, he gave no direction from a distance. The gloom which the trees 
concerning the route to San Stefano. threw around prevented their distinguishing 

While the Marchese at Naples was thus objects afar off, and not a single human being 
employed, and while Schedoni was forming was visible, nor any trace of his art, beneath 
further plans against Ellena, Vivaldi was the shadowy scene. They listened to ascer- 
wandering from village to village, and from tain from what direction the sounds ap- 
town to town, in pursuit of her whom all his proached, and heard a chorus of voices, 
efforts bad hitherto been unsuccessful to re- accompanied by a few instmments, perform- 
cover. From the people at the post-house at ing the evening service. 
Bracelli he had obtained little information *^We are near a convent, signor," said 
that could direct him ; they only knew that a Paulo, *' listen ! they are at their devotions.' 
carriage, such as had been described to Vi- " It is as you say," replied Vivaldi ; *' and 
valdi, with the blinds drawn up, changed we will make the best of our way towards it." 
horses there on the morning which he remem- *' Well, signor ! I must say, if we find as 
l»ered to be that of Ellena's departure, and good doings here as we had at the Capuchin's, 
had proceeded on the road to Morgagni. we shall have no reason to regret our beds 

When Vivaldi arrived thither jdl trace of alfresco among the chestnut branches." 
Ellena was lost ; the master of the post could ' ' Do you perceive any walls or spireS be- 
not recollect a single circumstance connected yond the trees?" said Vivaldi, as he led the 
with the travellers, and even if he had noticed way. 

them it would have been insufficient for Vi- *• N6ne, signor," replied Paulo ; " yet we 
valdi'ls purpose, unless he had also observed draw nearer the sounds. Ah, signor ! do you 
the road they followed, for at this place several hear that note? How it dies away! And 
roads branched off into opposite quarters of those instruments just touched in symphony ! 
the country. Vivaldi, therefore, was reduced This is not the music of peasants ; a convent 
to choose one of these as chance or fancy di- must be near, though we do not see it." 
rected ; and as it appeared probable that the Still, as they advanced, no walls appeared, 
Marchese had conveyed Ellena to a convent, and soon after the music ceased ; but other 
he determined to make inquiries at every one sounds led Vivaldi forward to a pleasant part 
on his way. of the woods, where he perceived a party 

He had now passed over some of the of pilgrims seated on the grass. They were 
wildest tracts of theApennine, among scenes laughing and conversing with much gaiety, 
which seemed abandoned by civilised society as each spread before him the supper which 
to the banditti who haunted their recesses, he drew from his scrip ; while he who ap- 
Yet even here, amidst wilds that were inacces- peared to be the Father-director of the pil- 
sible, convents, with each its small dependent giimage sat with a jovial countenance in the 
hamlet, were scattered, and, shrouded from midst of the companyr dispensing jokes and 
the world by woods and mountains, enjoyed merry stories, and receirii^ in return a tri- 
e/msvspectedly many of its luxuries, and dfs- bnte from every scrip. Wines of various sorts 
pMyed unnoticed some of its eleginoe, Vi- wereninged before him, of which he drank 



THR TTAUAN. 55 

atrandaiitly, aad seemed not to refuse any ^avaldi's horse, placed himself at thdr head, 
dainty that was offered. and, beginning a loud strain, they proceeded 

Vivaldi, whose apprehensions weie now in full chorus of melancholy music, 
quieted, stopped to observe the group, as The peasants, hearing their sonorous voices, 
the evening rays, glanciag along the skirts came forth to meet and conduct them to their 
of the wood, threw a gleam upon their cabins. The village was ah-eady crowded 
various countenances, showfai^, however, in with devotees, but these poor peasants, l»ok- 
each a spirit of gaiety that might have cha- ing up to them with love and reverenoe, mad<; 
racteriseq the individuals of a party of plea- every possittle contrivance to accommodate 
sure, rather than those of a pilgrimage. The all who came : notwithstanding which, when 
Fatker-direciorejad his flock seemed periectly Paulo soon after turned into his bed of straw, 
,to understand each other ; the Superior he had more reasons than one to regret his 
willingly resigned the solemn austerity of his chestnut mattress. 

office, aod permitted the company to make Vivaldi passed an anxious night, waiting 
themselves as happy as possible, in considera- impatiently for the dawning of that day which 
tion of recehring plenty of the most delicate might possibly restore to him Ellcna. Con- 
of their viands ; yet somewhat of dignity was sidering that a pilgrim's habit would not only 
mingled with his condescensions, that com- conceal him from suspicion, but allow him 
pelled them to receive even his jokes with a opportunities for observation, which his own 
degree of deference, and perhaps they dress would not permit, he employed Paulo 
laughed at them less for their spirit than to provide him one. The address of the ser- 
because they were favours. vant, assisted by a single ducat, easily pro- 

Addressing the Superior, Vivaldi requested cured it, and at an early hour he set forward 
to be directed how he might regain his way. on his inquiry. 
The father examined him for a moment before ._^» 

he replied ; but observing the elegance of his 

dress and a certain air of distinction, and CHAPTER XI. 

perceiving also that Paulo was his servant, he A FEW devotees only had begun to ascend 
promised his services, and invited him to ^~^ the mountain, and Vivaldi kept aloof 
take a seat at his right hand and partake of even from these, pursuing a lonely track, for 
the supper. - his thoughtful mmd desired solitude. The 

Vivaldi, understanding that the party was early breeze, sighing among the foliage that 

foing his road, accepted the invitation ; when waved high over the path, and the hollow daih- 
aulo, having fastened the horses to a tree, ing of distant waters, he listened to with corn- 
soon became busy with the supper. While placency, for these were soimds which soothed 
Vivaldi conversed with the father, Paulo en- yet promoted his melancholy mood ; and he 
grossed all the attention of the pilgrims near sometimes rested to gaze upon the scenery 
him ; they declared he was the merriest feUow around him, for this too was in harmony with 
tiiey had ever seen, and often expressed a the temper of his mind. Disappointment had 
wish that he was going as far with them as to subdued the wilder energy of the passions, 
the shrine in a convent of Carmelites, which and produced a solemn and lofty state oi 
terminated their pilgrimage. When Vivaldi feeling ; he viewed with pleasing sadness the 
understood that this shrine was in the church dark rocks and precipices, the gloomy 
of a convent, partly inhabited by nuns, and mountains and vast solitudes, that spread 
that it was little more than a league and a around him ; nor was the convent he was 
half distant, he determined to accompany approaching a less sacred feature of the 
them, for it w^ as possible that Ellena might scene, as its grey walls an. 1 pinnacles ap- 
be confined there as in any other cloister ; and peared beyond the dusky groves. '* Ah ! if 
of her being imprisoned in some convent he it should enclose her ! " said Vivaldi, as he 
had less doubt the more he considered the caught a Arst glimpse of its hall. "Vain 
character and views of his mother. He set hope I I will not invite your illusions again, 
forward, therefore, with the pilgrims, and on I will not expose myself to the agonies of 
foot, having resigned his horse to the weary new disappointment ; I will search, but not 
Fatker-diyector. expect. Yet, if she should be there ! " 

Darkness closed over them long before they Having reached the gates of the convent, 
reached the village where they designed to he passed with hasty steps into the court ; 
pass the night ; but they beguiled the way where his emotion increased ajs he paused 
with songs and stories, now and then only a moment and looked round its silent cloisters, 
stopping, at command of the father, to re- The porter only appeared, when Vivaldi, 
peat some prayer or sing a hymn. But, as fearful lest he should perceive him to be other 
they drew near a village, at the base of the than a pilgrim, drew his hood over his face, 
mountain on which the shrine stood, they and, gathering up his garments still closer in 
halted to arrange themselves in procession ; his folded ann«, i^«ftd^UNiV>^^>\V.^^^»s^K!c&^N 
and the Superior, havlsi^ stopped short in the thtoag)^ hft Vdami iaX. iiYkI^ ^V ^^ vftsoasik 
m}dst of oao of bis best Jilkea, dismounted Mqic% btoiVi^\^t^i0K)pe»su U'^i^^nwa"^ 



,.. *■• 



S6 THB ITAUAN. 

however, towards the church, a stately edifice sounds drew nearer, and Vivaldi perodved a 

detached and at some little distance from procession of nuns approaching from a dis- 

the other parts of the convent. Its highly- tant aisle. 

vaulted aisles, extending in twilight perspec- As they advanced, he distinguished the 

tive, where a monk or a pilgpm only now lady abb^ leading the train, dressed in her 

and then crossed, whose dark figures, passing pontifical robes, with the mitre on her head ; 

without sound, vanished like shadows ; the and well he marked' her stately step, moving 

universal stillness of the place, the gleam of in time to the slow minstrelsy, and the air of 

tapers from the high altar, and of lami^, proud yet graceful dignity with which she 

which gave a gloomy pomp to evezy shrine in characterized herself. Then followed the 

the church — all these circumstances conspired nuns, according to their several orders, and 

to impress a sacred awe upon his heart. last came the novices, carrying lighted tapers. 

He followed seme devotees through a side and surroimded by other nuns, who were dis- 

aisle to a court that was overhung by a tinguished by a particular habit, 

tremendous rode, in which was a cave, con- Having reached a part of the church appro- 

taining the shrine of our Lady of Mount priated for their reception, they arranged 

Carmel. This court was enclosed by the themselves in order. Vivaldi with a palpi- 

rock, and by the choir of the church, except tating heart inquired the occasion of this 

that to the south a small opening led the eye ceremony, and was told that a nun was going 

to a glimpse of a landscape below, whidi, to be professed. 

seent^yond the dark jaws of the cliff, ap- "You are informed, no doubt, brother," 

peared free and light, and gaily coloured, added the friar who gave him this intelligence, 

melting away into blue and (Ustant moun- |' that on the morning of our high festivsd, 

tains. our Lady's day, it is usual for such as devote 

Vivaldi entered the cave, where, enclosed themselves to heaven to receive the veil. 

within a filigree screen of gold, lay the image Stand by a while, and you will see the cere- 

of the saint, decorated with flowers and mony." 

lighted up by innumerable lamps and tapers. "What is the name of the novice who is 

The steps erf the shrine were thronged with now to receive it? " said Vivaldi, in a voice 

kneeling pilgrims, and Vivaldi, to avoid whose tremulous accents betrayed his emo- 

singularity, laieeled also ; till a high peal of tion. 

the organ, at a distance, and the deep voices The friar glanced an eye of scrutiny upon 

of choristers announced that the first mass him, as he replied, " J know not her name, 

was begun. He left the cave, and, returning but if you will step a little this way, I will 

into the church, loitered at an extremity of point her out to you." 

the aisles, where he listened awhile to the Vivaldi, drawing his hood over his face, 

solemn harmony pealing along the roofs, and obeyed in silence. 

softening away in distance. It was such full " It is she on the right of the abbess," said 

and entrancing music as frequently swells in the stranger, "who leans on the arm of a 

the high festivals of the Sicilian Church, nun ; she is covered with a white veil, and is 

and is adapted to inspire that sublime enthu- taller than her companions." 

siasm which sometimes elevates its disciples. Vivaldi observed her with a fearful eye, 

Vivaldi, unable to endure long the excess of and, though he did not recognise the person 

feeling which this harmony awakened, v;ras of Ellena, whether it was that his ifancy was 

leaving the church, when suddenly it ceased, possessed with her image, or that there was 

and the tolling of a bell sounded in its stead, truth in his surmise, he thought he perceived 

This seemed to be the knell of death, and it a resemblance of her. He inquired how 

occtirred to him, that a dying person was long the novice had resided in the convent, 

approaching to receive the last sacrament ; and many other particulars, to which the 

when he heard remotely a warbling of femsde stranger either could not or dared not reply, 

voices, mingling with the deeper tones of the With what anxious solicitude did Vivaldi 

monks, and with the hollow note of the bell, endeavour to look through the veils of the 

as it struck at intervals. So sweetly, so several nuns, in search of Ellena, whom he 

plaintively did the strain grow on the air believed the barbarous policy of his mother 

that those who listened, as well as those who might already have devoted to the doister. 

sung, were touched with sorrow, and seemed With a solicitude still stronger, he tried to 

equally to mourn for a departing friend. catch a glimpse of the featiu-es of the no\'ices, 

Vivaldi hastened to the choir, the pavement but their faces were shaded by hoods, and 

of which was strewn with palm branches and their white veils, though thrown half back, 

fresh flowers. A pall of black velvet lay upon were disposed in such artful folds that they 

the steps of the altar, where several priests concealed them from observation as eflectu- 

were silently attending. Every where appeared ally as did the pendant lawn the features of 

the ensigns of solemn pomp and ceremony, the nuns. 

M3d 3D every countqianca the stillness and The ceremony began with the exhortation 

(fitsayance pf expcctaUoit. Meanwhile the of \!he Fathnr-Abbot^ dcUvcr^ with solemn 



TUB ITAUAN. 



ST 



energy ; then the novice klieding before him 
made her profession, for which Vivaldi lis- 
tened with intense attention, but it was de- 
livered in such low and trembling accents, 
that he could not ascertain even the tone. 
But during the anthem that mingled with the 
ensuing part of the service, he thought he 
distinguished the voice of EUena— that touch- 
ing and well-known voice, which in the 
church of San Lorenzo had first attracted his 
attention. He listened, scarcely daring to 
draw breath, lest he should lose a note ; and 
again he landed her voice spoke in a part of 
the plaintive response delivered by the nuns. 

Vivaldi endeavoured to command his emo- 
tion, and to await with patience some further 
unfolding of the truth ; but when the priest 
prepared to withdraw the white veil from the 
mce of the novice, and throw the black one 
over her, a dreadful expectation that she was 
Ellena seized him, and he with difficulty for- 
bore stepping forward and discovering him- 
self on the instant. 

The veil was at length withdrawn, and a 
very lovelv £ace appeared, but not Ellena's. 
ViviEddi breathed again, and \^ted with toler- 
able composure for the conclusion of the 
ceremony ; till, in the solemn strain that fol- 
lowed the patting on of the black veil, he 
heard again the voice, which he was now 
convinced was her's. Its accents were low, 
and mournful, and tremulous, yet his heart 
acknowledged instantaneously their magic 
influence. 

When this ceremony had concluded an- 
other b^an, and he was told it was that of a 
novidation. A young woman, supported by 
two nuns, advanced to the altar, and Vivaldi 
thought he behdd Ellena. The priest was 
b^;inning the customary exhortation, when 
she lifted her hsdf-veil, and, showing a coun- 
tenance where meek sorrow was mingled with 
heavenly sweetness, raised her blue eyes, all 
bathed in tears, and waved her hand as if 
she would have spoken. It was Ellena her- 
self. 

The priest attempted to proceed. 

" I protest in the presence of this congre- 
gation," said she, solemnly, "that I am 
brought hither to pronounce vows which my 
heart disclaims. I protest " 

A confusion of voices interrupted her, and 
at the same time she perceived Vivaldi rush- 
ing towards the altar. Ellena gazed for a 
moment, and then, stretching forth her sup- 
plicating hands towards him, closed her eyes, 
and sank into the arms of some persons round 
her, who vainly endeavoured to prevent him 
from approaching and assisting her. The 
anguish with whidi he bent over her lifeless 
form and called upon her name exdted the 
commiseration even of the nuns, and espe- 
cially of Olivia, who was most assiduous in 
efforts to revive herroung Mend, 

'When SUm^ tmcfdfedbcr eiyes, mi, look* 



ingup, once more beheld VlvaUIf the expres- 
sion with which she regarded him told that 
her heart was imchangod, and that she was 
unconsdous of the miseries of imprisonment 
while he was with her. She desiied to with- 
draw, and, assisted by Vivaldi and Olivia, 
was leaving the church, when the abbess 
ordered that she should be attended by the 
nuns only ; and, retiring from the altar, she 
gave directions that the young stranger 
should be conducted to the parlour of the 
convent. 

Vivaldi, though he refused to obey an im- 
perious command, yidded to the entreaties 
of Ellena, and to the gentle remonstrances of 
Olivia ; and, bidding Ellena farewell for a 
while, he repaired to the parlour of the 
abbess. He was not without some hope of 
awakening her to a sense of justice or of 
pity ; but he found that her notions of right 
were inexorably against him, and that pride 
and resentment usurped the influence of every 
other feeline. She began her lecture with 
expressing me warm ^cndship she had so 
long cherished for the Marchesa, his mother ; 
proceeded to lament that the son of a friend 
whom she so highly esteemed should have 
forgotten his duty to his parents, and tlie 
observance due to the dignity of his house, 
so far as to seek connection with a person of 
Ellena di Rosalba's inferior station ; and con- 
cluded with a severe reprimand for having 
disturbed the tranquillity of her convent and 
the decorum of the church by his intrusion. 

Vivaldi listened with submitting patience 
to this mention of morals and decorum from 
a person who, with the most perfect self- 
applause, was violating some of the plainest 
obligations of humanity and justice ; who had 
conspired to tear an orphan from her home, 
and who designed to deprive her for life of 
liberty, with all the blessings it inherits. But, 
when she proceeded to speak of Ellena with 
the caustic of severe reprobation, and to hint 
at the punishment which her public rejection 
of the vows had incurred, the patience of 
Vivaldi submitted no longer ; indignation and 
contempt rose high against the Superior, and 
he exhibited a portrait of herself in the strong 
colours of truth. But the mind which com- 
passion could not persuade, reason could not 
appal — selfishness had hardened it alike to 
the influence of each ; her pride only was 
affected, and she retaliated the mortification 
she suffered by menace and denunciation. 

Vivaldi, on quitting her apartment, had no 
other resource than an application to the 
Adate, whose influence, at least, if not his 
authority, might assuage the severity of her 
power. In this Abate a mildness of temper 
and a genUeness of manner were qualities of 
less value than is usually and dssfinN^*^^ Sss^- 
puted to them \ lot, \^Xk,^ «:«KaRR.\sA. ^w!^ 
feebleness ol mVnd, \3i£i^N H««t^\wx>iXA^^'»ss* 



5ft TUB tTAUAtt. 

difflciilljr lievdr assumed the character* of despairing^ of touching a heart so liaidened 
Tirtues, by inducing him to serve those for by selftsh prudence, and indignant at t)ehold- 
whom he might feel. And thus, with a tern- ing an a^thy so vicious in Its consequence, 
per and disposition directly opposite to those he left the Abate without other effort. He 
of the severe and violent abbess, he was perceived that he must now have recourse to 
equedly selfish and almost equally culpable ; further stratagem, a recourse which his frank 
since, by permitting evil, he was nearly as and noble knind detested; but he had already 
injurious in his conduct as those who planned tried, without success, every other possibility 
it. Indolence and timidity — the consequence of rescuing the innocent victim of the Mar- 
of want of clear perception— deprived him chesa's prejudice and pride, 
of all energy of character ; he was prudent Ellena meanwhile nad retired to her cell, 
rather than wise, and so fearful of being agitated by a variety of considerations, and 
thought to do wrong that he seldom did contrary emotions, of which, however, those 
right. of joy and tenderness were long predominant. 

To Vivaldi's temperate representations and Then came anxiety, apprehension, pride, and 
earnest entreaties that he Would exert some doubt, to divide and torture her heart. It 
authority towards liberating Ellena, he was true that Vivaldi had discovered her 
listened with patience ; acknowledged the prison, but if it were possible that he could 
hardships of her situation ; lamented the un- release her, she must consent to quit it with 
happy divisions between Vivaldi and his him; a step from which a mind so tremblingly 
family, and then declined advancing a single jealous of propriety as her's recoiled with 
step in so delicate an affair. Signora di alarm, though it would deliver her from cap- 
Rosalba, he said, was in the cane of the tivity. And how, when she considered the 
abbess, over whom he had no right of con- haughtycharacter of the Marchesedi Vivaldi, 
trol in matters relative to her domestic con- the impierious and vindictive nature of the 
cems. Vivaldi then supplicated, that though March^, and, still more, their united repug- 
he possessed no authority, he would at least nance to a connection With her, how could 
intercede or remonstrate against so unjust a she endure to think, even for a moment of 
procedure as that of detaining Ellena a pri- intruding herself into such a family I Pride, 
soner, and assist in restoring her to the home delicacy, good sense seemed to warn her 
from which she had been forcibly carried. against a conduct so humiliating and vexa- 

•'And this, again," replied the Abate, tious in its consequences, and to exhort her 
•' does not come within my jurisdiction ; and to preserve her own dignity by independence ; 
I make it a rule never to encroach upon that but the esteem, the friendship, the tender 
of another person." affection, which she had cherished for Vivaldi 

" And can you endure, holy father," said made her pause and shrink with emotions 
Vivaldi, "to witness a flagrant act of injustice of little less than horror, from the eternal 
and not endeavour to counteract it ; not even renunciation which so dignified a choice 
step forward to rescue the victim when 3rou required. Though the encouragement, which 
perceive the preparation for the sacrifice ? " her deceased relative had given to this attach- 

•' I repeat, that I never interfere with the ment seemed to impart to it a sacred cha- 
authority of others," replied the Superior ; racter, that considerably soothed the alarmed 
"having asserted my own, I yield to them, delicacy of Ellena, the approbation thus 
in their sphere, the obedience which I require implied had no power to silence her own 
in mine.' objections and she would have regretted the 

"Is power then," said Vivaldi, "theih- mistaken zeal which had contributed to lead 
fallible test of justice ? Is it morality to obey her into the preseiit distressing situation, had 
where the command is criminal ? The whole she revered the memory of her aUnt or loved 
world have a claim \ipon the fortitude, the Vivaldi less. Still, however, the joy, which 
activefortiludeof those who are placed, as you his presence had occasioned, and which the 
are, between the alternative of confirming a consciousness that he was still near her had 
wrongbyyour consent, or preventing it by your prolonged, was not subdued, though it was 
resistance. Would that your heart expanded frequentiy obscured by silch anxious con- 
towards that world, reverend father ! ' siderations. With jealous and indiscreet 

" Would that the whole world were wrong solicitude, she now recollected every look 
that you might have the glory of setting it and the accent of every word which had 
right!" said the Aljate, smiling. "Young told that his affection was lindiminished ; 
man I you are an enthusiast, and I pardon thus seeking, with inconsistent zeal, for a 
you. You are a km'ght of chivalry, who conviction of the very tendeThess which but 
would go about the earth fighting with every- a moment before she had thought it would be 
body, by way of proving your right to do prudent to lament, iihd almost fiec^saty to 
good ; it is unfortunate you are bom some- renounce. 

^7?\}^. late." She awaited with extreme anxiety the ap- 

^f^^Sa^ff"! '^ '^^ ^"^e of hmnanity " pearance of Olivia, who might probably kn6# 

■sajtj viv^idi, but be checked fe/mself ; and the tdrtiU d VmM^'t ^:m£«wSM ttfth the 



THE ITALIAN. 



59 



abbess, and whether he was yet in the con- 
vent. 

In the evening Olivia came, a messenger of 
evil ; and Ellena, informed of the conduct of 
the abbess, and the consequent departure of 
Vivaldi, perceived all her courage, and all the 
half-formed resolutions which a considera- 
tion of hfs family had suggested, falter and 
expire. Sensible onlv of grief and despond- 
ency, she ascertained, for the first time, the 
extent of her affection and the severity of her 
situation. She x)erceived, also, that the in- 
justice which his family had exercised to- 
wards her, absolved her from all consideration 
of their displeasure, otherwise than as it might 
affect herself; but this was a conviction which 
it were now probably useless to admit. 

Olivia not only expressed the tenderest in- 
terest in her welfare, but seemed deeply af- 
fected with her situation ; and, whether it 
was that the nun's misfortunes bore some 
resemblance to Ellena's, or from whatever 
cause, it is remarkable that her eyes were 
often filled with tears, while she rcgsuxled her 
young friend, and she betrayed so much emo- 
tion that Ellena noticed it with surprise. 
She was, however, too delicate to hint any 
curiosity on the subject ; and too much 
engaged by a nearer mterest to dwell long 
upon the circumstance. 

When Olivia withdrew, Ellena retired to 
her turret, to soothe her spirits with a view of 
serene and majestic nature, a resource which 
seldom failed to elevate her mind and soften 
the asperities of affliction. It was to her like 
sweet and solemn music, breathing peace over 
the soul— like the oaten stop of Milton's 

spirit. 

While she sat before a window, observing 
the evening light beaming up the valley, and 
touching all the distant mountains with misty 
purple, a r««d as sweet, though not as fanci- 
ful, sounded from among the rocks below. 
The instrument and the character of the 
strain were such as shehad been unaccustomed 
to hear within the walls of San Stefano, and 
the tone diffused over her spirits a pleasing 
melancholy that rapt all her attention. The 
liquid cadence, as it trembled and sunk away, 
seemed to tell the dejection of no vulgar feel- 
ings ; and the exquisite taste with which the 
complaining notes were agsun swelled almost 
convinced her that the musician was Vivaldi. 

On looking from the lattice, she perceived 
a person perched on a point of the cliff below, 
whither it appeared almost impracticable for 
any human step to have climbed, and preserved 
from the precipice only by some dwarf shrubs 
that fringed the brow. The twilight did not 
permit her Immediately to ascertain whether 
It was Vivaldi, and the situation was so dan- 

Serous that she hoped it was not he. Her 
oubts were removed when, looking up, he 
perceived Ellena and she heard bis voice. 
ViYsJdl bad le&med from a, lay-hreib&r of 



the convent, whom Paulo had bribed, and 
who, when he worked in the garden, h:id 
sometimes seen Ellena at the window, that 
she frequented tliis remote turret ; und. at 
the hazard of his Ufe, be had now ventured 
thither, with a hope of conversing with her. 

Ellena, alarmed at his tremendous situation, 
refused to listen to him, but he would not 
leave the spot till he had communicitcd a 
plan concerted for her escipe; and, intruitin;; 
that she would confide herself tu his utrc, 
assured her she would be conducted to wliere- 
ever she judged proper. It appeared that the 
brother had consented to assist his views, in 
consideration of an ample reward, and to 
admit him within the walls on this evening, 
when, in his pilgrim's habit, he might have 
an opportunity of again seeing Ellena. He 
conjured her to attend, if possible, in the con- 
vent parlour during supper ; explaining, in a 
few words, the motive for this recjuest, and 
the substance of the following particulars * 

The lady-<ibbess, in observance of the cus- 
tom upon high festivals, gave a collation to 
the padre abate and such of the priests as 
had assisted at vesper-service. A few strangers 
of distinction and pilgrims were also to par- 
take of the entertainments of this night, among 
which was included a concert to be performed 
by the nuns. At the collation was to be dis- 
played a profusion of delicacies, arranged by 
the sisters, who had been busy in preparing 
the pastry and confectionery during several 
days, and who excelled in these arucles no 
less than in embroidery and other ingenious 
arts. This supper was to be given in the 
abbess's outer parlour, while she herself, 
attended by some nuns of high rank, and a 
few favourites, was to have a table in the 
inner apartment, where, separated only by 
the grate, she could partake of the conversa- 
tion of the holy fathers. The tables were to 
be ornamented with artificial flowers, and a 
variety of other fanciful devices upon which 
the ingenuity of the sisters had ucen long 
employed ; who prepared for these festivals 
with as much vanity, and expected them to 
dissipate the gloomy monotony of their usual 
life with as much eagerness of delight, as a 
young beauty anticipates a first ball. 

On this evening, therefore, every member 
of the convent would be engaged either by 
amusement or business ; and to Vivaldi, who 
had been careful to inform himself of these 
circumstances, it would be easy, with the 
assistance of the brother, to obtain admit- 
tance, and mingle himself among the specta- 
tors, disguised in his pilgrim's habit. He 
entreated, therefore, that Ellena would con- 
trive to be in the abbess's apartment this 
evening, when he would endeavour to convey 
to her some further particulate olX\ifc^Na3^<2^ 
escape, and wou\dVva\ft rcvxiX&e va.N»2\NlvR% ^v. 
the fool of l\xe mounxam, \.ci co\i^>\K^. \v^^ No 
Villa Altieri, or to lYiCi TV8^^\i^>axvs^&. ^\w«i\. 



6o THE ITALIAN, 

of the Santa della Pieta. Vivaldi secretly but how you may avoid it. Within the 
hoped that she might be prevailed with to deepest recesses of our convent is a stone 
give him her hand on quitting San Stefano, chamber, secured by doors of iron, to which 
but he forbore to mention this hope, lest it such of the sisterhood as have been guilty of 
should be mistaken for a condition, and that any heinous offence have, from time to time, 
Ellena might be either reluctant to accept his been consigned. This condenmation admits 
assistance, or, accepting it, might consider of no reprieve ; the unfortunate captive is 
herself bound to grant a hasty consent. left to languish in chains and darkness, receiv- 

To his mention of escape she listened with ing only an allowance of bread and water 
varying emotion, at one moment attending to it just suffident to prolong her sufferings, till 
witn hope and joy,as promising heronly chance nature, at length, sinking imder their intoler- 
of liberation from an imprisonment which was able pressure, obtains refuge in death. Our 
probably intended to last for her life, and of recordsrelate several instancesof such horrible 
restoring her to Vivaldi ; and at another, re- punishment, which has generally been in- 
coiling from the thought of departing with fiicted upon nuns who, weary of the life 
him while his family was so decidedly averse which they had chosen under the first ddu- 
to their marriage. Thus, unable to form any sions of the imagination, or which they had 
instant resolution on the subject, and intreat- been compelled to accept by the rigour or 
ing that he would leave his dangerous station avarice of parents, have been detected in 
before the thickening twilight should increase escaping from the convent." 
the hazard of his descent, Ellena added that The nun paused, but Ellena remaining wrapt 
she would endeavour to obtain admittance to in silent thought, she resumed : " One miser- 
the apartment of the abbess, and to acquaint able instance of this severity has occurred 
him with her finaJ determination. Vivaldi within my memory. I saw the wretched 
understood sJl the delicacy of her scruples, victim enter that apartment— never more to 
and though they afflicted him, he honoured quit it alive ! I saw, also, her poor remains 
the good sense and just pride that suggested laid at rest in the convent garden 1 During 
them. nearly two years she languished upon a bed 

He lingered on the rock till the last moments of straw, denied even the poor consolation of 
of departing light, and then, wiUi a heart conversing through the grate with such of 
fluttering with hopes and fears, bade Ellena the sistars as pitied her ; and who of us was 
farewell, and descended : while she watched there that did not pity her I A severe punish- 
his progress through the silent gloom, fiuntly ment was threatened to those who should 
distinguishing him gliding along ledges of the approach with any compassionate intention ; 
precipice, and malung Ms adventurous way thank God 1 I incurred it, and I endured it, 
from cUfif to cliff, till the winding thickets also, with secret triumph." 
concealed him from her view. Still anxious. A gleam of satisfaction passed over Olivia's 
she remained at the lattice, but he appeared countenance as she spoke this ; it was the 
no more ; no voice announced disaster ; and, sweetest that Ellena had ever observed there, 
at length, she returned to her cell, to deliberate With a sympathetic emotion, she threw her- 
on the subject of her departure. self on the bosom of the nun and wept ; for 

Her considerations were interrupted by some moments they were both silent. Olivia, 
Olivia, whose manner indicated something at length, said, ' ' Do you not believe, my 
extraordinary ; the usual tranquillity of her child, that the officious and offended abbess 
countenance was gone, and an air of grief will readily seize upon the circumstance of 
mingled with apprehension appeared there, your disobedience as a pretence for confining 
Before she spoke, she examined the passage you in that fatal chamber? The wishes of 
and looked roimd the cell. " It is as I feared," theMarchesa will thus surely be accomplished 
said she abruptly ; " my suspicions are justi- without the difficulty of exacting your obedi- 
fied, and you, my child, are sacrificed, unless ence to the vows. Alas I I have received 
it were possible for you to quit the convent proof too absolute of her intention, and that 
this night." to-morrow is assigned as the day of your 

">^^at is it that you mean?" said the sacrifice ; you may. perhaps, be thankful that 
alarmed Ellena. the business of the festival has obliged her to 

"I have just learned," resumed the nun, defer executing the sentence even till to- 
" that your conduct this morning, which is morrow." 

understood to have thrown a premeditated Ellena replied only with a groan, as her 
insult upon the abbess, is to be punished with head still drooped upon the shoulder of the 
what they call imprisonment ; alas I why nun ; she was not now. hesitating whether 
should I soften the truth, — with what I b&- to accept the assistance of Vivaldi, but de- 
lieve is death itself, for who ever returned sponding lest his utmost efforts for her deliver- 
alive from that hideous chamber 1 " ance should be vain. 

"With death I "said Ellena, aghast ;*' oh, Olivia, who mistook the cause of her 
heavens ! how have I deserved death?" silence, added, "Other hints I could give, 

'< That is not the question, my daughter ; wlu^ ^]:« stix>iig as tbey are dreadful, but I 



THE ITALIAN. 



6z 



will forbear. Tell me how it is possible I may 
assist you ; I am willing to incur a second 
punishment, in endeavouring to relieve a 
second sufferer." 

Ellena's tears flowed fast at this new in- 
stance of the nun's generosity. " But if 
they should discover you in assisting me to 
leave the convent 1 " she said, in a voice con- 
vulsed by her gratitude, " Oh ! if they 
should discover you I — " 

" I can ascertain the punishment," Olivia 
replied with firmness, " and do not fear to 
meet it." 

" How nobly generous this is ! " said the 
weeping EUena ; " I ought not to suffer you 
to be thus careless of yourself 1 " 

" My conduct is not wholly disinterested," 
the nun modestly replied; "for I think I 
could endure an^ punishment with more for- 
titude than the sickening anguish of behold- 
ing such sufferings as I have witnessed. 
What are bodily pains in comparison with 
the subtle, the exquisite tortures of Uie 
mind I Heaven knows I can support my 
own afflictions, but not the view of those of 
others when they are excessive. The instru- 
ments of torture I believe I could endure, if 
my spirit was invigorated with the conscious- 
ness of a generous purpose ; but pity touches 
upon a nerve that vibrates instantly to the 
heart, and subdues resistance. Yes, my 
child, the agony of pity is keener than any 
other, excqpt that of remorse, and even in 
remorse it is, perhaps, the mingling unavail- 
ing pity that points the sting. But whil« I 
am indulging this egotism, I am, perhaps, 
increasing your danger of the suffering I 
deprecate." 

EUlena, thus encouraged by the generous 
sympathy of Olivia, mentioned Vivaldi's 
purposed visit of this evening ; and consiilted 
with her on the probability of procuring ad- 
mittance for herself to the abbess's parlour. 
Reanimated by this intelligence, Olivia ad- 
vised her to repair not only to the supper- 
room, but to attend the previous concert, to 
which several strangers would be admitted, 
among whom might probably be Vivaldi. 
When, to this, EUena objected her dread of 
the abbess's observation, and of the imme- 
diate seclusion that would follow, Olivia 
soothed her fears of discovery by offering 
her the disguise of a nun's veil, and pro- 
mising not only to conduct her to the apart- 
ment, but to afford every possible assistance 
towards her escape. 

"Among the crowd of nuns who will 
attend in that spacious apartment," Olivia 
added, "it is improbable you would be 
distinguished, even if the sisters were less 
occupied by amusement, and the abbess were 
at leisure to scrutinise. As it is, you vdU 
hazard little danger of discovery ; the 
superior, if she thinks of you at all, will 
bweve yon are sUU a prisoner in your cell ; 



but this is an evening of too much import- 
ance to her vanity for any consideration 
distinct from that emotion to divide her at- 
tention. Let hope, therefore, support you, 
my child, and do you prepare a few lines to 
acquaint Vivaldi with your consent to his 
proposal, and with the urgency of your 
circumstances ; you may, perhaps, find an 
opportunity of conveying them through 
the grate." 

They were still conversing on this subject, 
when a particular chime sounds, which 
Olivia said summoned the nims to the con- 
cert-room ; and she inunediately hastened for 
a black veil, while Ellena wrote the few lines 
that were necessary for Vivaldi. 



CHAPTER XII. 

WRAPT in Olivia's veil, Ellena descended 
to the music-room and mingled with 
the nuns who were assembled within the 
grate. Among the monks and pilgrims with- 
out it were some strangers in the usual dress 
of the country, but she did not perceive any 
person who resembled Vivaldi ; and she con- 
sidered that, if he were present, he would not 
venture to discover himself, while her nun's 
veil concealed her as effectually from him as 
from the lady abbess. It would be necessary, 
therefore, to seek an opportunity of with- 
drawing it for a moment at the grate, an 
expedient which must, however, expose her 
to the notice of strangers. 

On the entrance of the lady abbess, EUena's 
fear of observation rendered her insensible to 
every other consideration ; she fancied that 
the eyes of the Superior were particularly 
directed upon herself. The veil seemed an 
insufficient protection from their penetrating 
glances, and she almost sank with the terror 
of instant discovery. 

The abbess, however, passed on, and, 
having conversed for a few moments with the 
padre abate and some visitors of distinction, 
took her chair ; and the performance imme- 
diately opened with one of those solemn and 
impressive airs which the Italian nuns know 
how to give with so much taste and sweet- 
ness. It rescued even Ellena for a moment 
from a sense of danger, and she resigned her- 
self to the surrounding scene, of which the 
coup d'ail was striking and grand. In a 
vaulted apartment of considerable extent, 
lighted by innumerable tapers, and where 
even the ornaments, though pompoiis, par- 
took of the solemn character of the institu- 
tion, were assembled about fifty nuns, who, 
in the interesting habit of their order, ap- 
peared with gracdiil plainness. The delicacy 
of their air, and their beauty, softened by the 
lawn that thinfy veiled it, were contrasted by 
the severe majesty of the lady abbess, who, 
seated on an elevated chair, apart from U\^ 
audience, seem^ xYm^ WiV^<^^* '>^ ^^^" ' ^^ ^^^^ 



62 THE ITALIAN. 

and by the venerable figures of the father Ellena, perceiving that she was known, 
abate and his attendant monks, who were did not raise her veil, but advanced a few 
arranged without that screen of wir&«work, steps towards the grate. Vivaldi there de- 
extending the whole breadth of the apart- posited a small folded paper, and before she 
roent, which is called the grate. Near the could venture to deliver her own billet, he 
holy father were placed the strangers of dis> had retired among the crowd. As she stepped 
tinction, dr^sed in the splendid Neapolitan forward to secure his letter, she observed a 
habit, whose gay colouring and airy elegance nun hastily approach the spot where he had 
opposed well with the dark drapery of the laid it, and she paused. The garment of the 
ecclesiastics ; their plumed hats loftily over- recluse wafted it from the place where it had 
topping the half-cowled heads and grey locks been partly concealed ; and when EUena per- 
of the monks. Nor was the contrast of ceived the nun's foot rest upon the paper, 
countenances less striking ; the grave, the she with difficulty disguised her apprehen- 
austere, the solemn, and the gloomy inter- sions. 

mingling with the light, the blooming, and A friar, who from without the grate ad- 
the debonnaire, expressed all the various tem- dressed the sister, seemed with much eomest- 
pers that render life a blessing or a burden, ness, yet with a certain air of secrecy, com- 
and, as with the spell of magic, transform municating some important intelligence. The 
this world into a transient paradise or purga- fears of Ellena suggested that he had ob- 
tory. In the background of the picture stood served the action of Vivaldi, and was making 
some pilgrims, with looks less joyous and known his suspicions ; and she expected every 
more demure than they had worn on the road instant to see the nun hft up the paper and 
the preceding day ; and among them were deliver it to the abbess, 
some inferior brothers and attendants of the From this immediate apprehension, how- 
convent. To this part of the chamber Ellena ever, she was released when the sister pushed 
frequently direct^ her attention, but did not it gently aside without examination, a cir^ 
distinguish Vivaldi ; and, though she had cumstance that not less surprised than re- 
taken a station near the grate, she had not lieved her. But, when the conference broke 
courage indecorously to withdraw her veil up, and the friar, hastily retreating among 
before so many strangers. And thus, if he the crowd, disappeared from the apartment, 
even were in the apartment, it was not pro- and the nun approached and whispered the 
bable he would venture to come forward. Superior, all her terrors were renewed. She 

The concert concluded without his having scarcely doubted that Vivaldi was detected, 

been perceived by Ellena, and she withdrew and that his letter was designedly left where 

to the apartment where the collation was it »had been deposited for the purpose of 

spread, and where the abbess and her guests alluring her to betray herself. Trembling, 

soon after appeared. Presently she observed dismayed, and almost sinking with ap- 

a stranger in a pilgrim s habit station himself prehension, she watched the countenance of 

near the grate ; his face was partly muffled in the abbess while the nun addressed her, and 

his cloak, and he seemed to be a spectator thought she read her own fate in the frown 

rather than a partaker of the feast. that appeared there. 

Ellena, who understood this to be Vivaldi, Whatever might be the intentions or the 
was watchful for an opportunity of approach- directions of the Superior, no active measure 
ing, unseen by the abbess, the place where was at present employed ; the recluse, 
he had fixed himself. Engaged in oonversa- having received an answer, retired quietly 
tion with the ladies around her, the Superior among the sisters, and the abbc»s resumed 
soon favoured Ellena's wish, who, having her usual manner. Ellena, however, suppos< 
reached the grate, ventured to lift her veil for ing she was now obsecved, did not daxe to 
one instant. The stranger, letting his cloak seize the paper, thougB she believed it con- 
fall, thanked her with his eyes fox her con- tained momentous information ; and feared 
descension, and she perceived that he was that the time was now escaping which might 
not Vivaldi ! Shocked at the interpretation £EUulitate her deliverance. Whenever she 
which might be given to a conduct appa- ventured to look round, the eyes of the 
rently so improper, as much as by the disap- abbess seemed pointed upon her, and she 
pointment which Vivaldi's absence occasioned, judged from the position of the nun, for the 
shewas hastily retiring, when another stranger veil concealed her face, that she also was 
approached with quick steps, whom she in- vigilantly regarding her. 
stantly knew, by the grace and spirit of his Above an hour had elapsed in this state of 
air, to be Vivaldi ; but, determined not to be anxious suspense when the collation con- 
exposed a second time to th«r possibility of a eluded, and the assembly broke up, during 
mistake, she awaited silently vift some further the general bustle of which Ellena ventured 
signal of his identity. His ^es were fixed to the grate and secured the paper. As she 
apon her In earnest attenxSoik Before he drew concealed it in her robe, she scarcely dared 
aside the cloak from bis face, ' But he soon to inquire by a hasty glance whether she had 
did so ;— and it was VUvsOtU hinueif. . been observed, and vJO\jid Yvw^ ^VCcAtaw^wa. 



THE ITAUAH. 63 

Immediately to examine the contents, had said that success depended upon expedition, 

she not perceived, at the same instant, the and that he had probably watched at tlio 

abbess quitting the apartment. On looking appointed place ; m such an interval how 

round for the nun, Ellena discovered that many circumstances might have <x'curr<>fl to 

she was gone. destroy every {lossibility of a retreat, which it 

^cna followed distantly in the abbess's was certain the engagement of the abljoss and 

train ; and, as she drew nearer to Olivia, sisters no longer favoured I 
^ve a signal, and passed on to her cell. The generous Olivia, having rcid the billet, 

There, once more alone, and having secured partook of all her jroung friend's distrt-ss. 

the door, she sat down to read Vivaldi's and was as willing as Eilena was anxious 10 

billet, tiying to command her impatience, dare every danger for the chance of obtaining 

and to understand the lines, over which her deliverance. 

sight rapidly moved, when, in the eagerness Ellena could feel gratitude ftx* such good- 

of turning over the paper, the lamp dropped nes3 even at this moment of ngonising aiipro 

from her trembling hand and expired. Her hension. After a pause of deep considcra- 

distress now nearly reached despair. Togo tion, Olivia said, "In every avenue of the 

forth into the convent for a light was utterly convent we are now liable to meet some of 

impracticable, since it would betray that she the nuns ; but my veil, though thin, has hither- 

Was no longer a prisoner, and not only would to protected you, and we must hope it may 

Olivia suffer from a discovery of the indul- still assist your purpose. It will be necessary, 

gence she had granted, but she herself would however, to pass through the refectory, where 

be immediately confined. Her only hope such of the sisters as did not partake of the 

rested upon Olivia's arrival before it might collation are assembled at supper and will 

be too late to practise the instructions of remain so till the first matin calls them to 

Vivaldi, if. indeed, they were still practicable ; the chapel. If we wait till then, I fear it will 

and she Ustened with intense solicitude for be to no purpose to go at all." 
an approaching footstep, while she yet held, Ellcna's fears pmrfectly agreed with those of 

ignorant of its contenrs, the billet that Olivia ; and entreating that another moment 

probably would decide her fate. A thousand might not t)e lost in hesitation, and that she 

times she turned about the eventful paper, would lead the way to the nuns' garden, they 

endeavoured to trace the lines with her quitted the cell together, 
fingers, and to guess their import, thus enve- Several of the sisters passed them as they 

loped in mystery ; while she experienced all descended to the refectory, but without par- 

the various torture that the consciousness of ticularly noticing Ellena, who, as she drew 

hfaving in her very hand the information on near that alarming apartment, ^rapt her veil 

a timely knowledge of which her life, per- closer and leaned with heavier pressure upon 

haps, depended, without being able to under- the arm of her faithful friend. At the door 

stand it, could inflict. they were met by the abbess, who had been 

Presently she heard advancing steps, and a overlooking the nuns assembled at supper, 

light gleamed from the passage before she and missing Olivia, had inquired for her. 

cunsi£red they might be some other than Ellena shrank back to elude observation, and 

Olivia's, and that it was prudent to conceal to let the Superior pass ; but Olivia was 

the billet she held. The consideration, how- obliged to answer to the summons. Having, 

ever, came too late to be acted upon; for, however, unveiled herself, she was permitted 

before the rustling paper was disposed of, a to proceed ; and Ellena, who had mingled 

person entered the cell, and Ellena beheld with the crowd that surrounded the abbess, 

her friend. Pale, trembling, and silent, she and thus escaped detection, followed Olivia, 

took the lamp from the nun, and eagerly with faltering steps, through the refectory, 

running over Vivaldi's note,leamed that at the The nuns were, luckily, too much engaged 

time it was written brother Jeronimo was in by the entertainment at this moment to look 

waiting without the gate of the nuns' garden, round them, and the fugitive reached, unsus- 

where Vivaldi designed to join him imme- pected, an opposite door, 
diately, and conduct her by a private way In Uie hall to which they descended the 

beyond the walls. He added that horses adventurers were frequently crossed by ser- 

were stationed at the foot of the mountain vants bearing dishes from the refecttjry to the 

to convey her wherever she should judge kitchen ; and, at the very moment when they 

proper ; and conjured her to be expeditious, were opening the door that led into the gar- 

since other circumstances, besides the uni- den, a sister, who had observed them, de- 

vo^ engagement of the recluses, were at manded whether they had yet heard the matin- 

that moment particularly favoiuAble to an bell, since they were going towards the chapel, 
escape. Terrified at this critical interruption, Ellena 

Ellena, desponding and appalled, gave the pressed Olivia's arm, in signal of silence, aud 

paper to Olivia, requesting she would read it was hastening forwaid, >«\vea^V^^a.^.^sx,T^^R!» 

hastily, abd advise her how to act. U was ptudent, paused, find Ca^rcX'j OLXiswca^^ ^^ 

itow va hoar and a half since V7?Bldi fajul qttestioni ^9A th«& iQSlex»dU> -^RncAK^ 



d4 THB ITAUAN. 

• 

As they crossed the irarden towards the never see you more, but I shall always love 

gate, Ellena's anxiety lest Vivaldi should have you; and you have promised that I shall 

een compelled to leave it, increased so much hear from you. Remember the Convent della 

that she had scarcdy power to proceed. Pieta ! " 

" Oh, if my strength should fail before I " You should have settled this matter 

reach it I " she said softly to Olivia, " or if I within," said Jeronimo ; "we have been here 

should reach it too late I " these two hours already." 

Olivia tried to cheer her, and pointed out " Ah, EUena I " said Vivaldi, as he gently 

the gate, on which the moonlight fell. "At disengaged her from the mm, "do I then 

the end of this walk only," said Olivia; hold only the second place in your heart?" 

" see 1— where the shadows of the trees open EUena, as she dismissed her tears,^eplied 

is your goal." with a sznile more eloquent than words ; and 

Encouraged by the view of it, EUena fled when she had again and again bade adieu to 

with Ughter steps along the aUey ; but the OUvia, she gave him her hand and quitted 

gate seemed to mock her approach, and to the gate. 

retreat before her. Fatigue overtook her in "It is moonUght," observed Vivaldi to 

this long avenue before she could overtake Jeronimo ; " your lamp is useless, and may 

the spot so anxiously sought, and, breathless oetray us." 

and exhausted, she was once more compeUed " It wiU be necessary in the church," replied 

to stop, and once more in the agony of terror Jeronimo, "and in some circuitous avenues 

exclaimed, ' ' Oh, if my strength should fail we must pass, for I dare not lead you out 

before I reach it !— Oh, if I should drop even through the great gates, signor, as you well 

while it is within my view I " know." 

The pause of a moment enabled her to " Lead on, then," repUed Vivaldi, and they 
proceed, and she stopped not again tiU she reached one of the cypress walks that ex- 
arrived at the gate ; when Olivia sugjgested tended to the church : but before they entered 
the prudence of ascertaining who was without, it, EUena paused and looked back to the 
and of receiving an answer to the signal garden gatei^ that she might see Olivia once 
which Vivaldi had proposed, before they ven- again. The nun was stiU there, and EUena 
tured to make themselves known. She then perceived her faintly in the moonlight, -wavii^ 
struck upon the wood, and, in the anxious her hand in signal of a last adieu. . EUena's 
pause that foUowed, whispering voices were heart was fuU ; she wept, and lingered, and 
distinctly heard from without, but no signal returned the signal, tiU the gentle violence of 
spoke in reply to the nun's. Vivaldi withdrew her from the spot. 

"We are betrayed ! " said EUena, sofdy ; " I envy your friend those tears," said he, 
"but I wiU know the worst at once," and "and feel jealous of the tenderness that ex- 
she repeated the signal, when, to her luispeak- cites them. Weep no more, my EUena." 
able joy, it was answered by three smart raps " If vou knew her worth," repUed EUena, 
upon the gate. Olivia, more distrustful, " and the obligations I owe her I Her voice 
would have checked the sudden hope of her was lost in sighs, and ^Hvialdi only pressed 
friend tiU some further proof had appeared her hand in silence. 

that it was Vivaldi who waited without, but As they traversed the gloomy walk that led 

the precaution came too late ; a key already to the church, "N^valdi said, "Are you certain, 

grated in the lock ; the door opened, and father, that not any of the brothers are doing 

two persons, muffled in their garments, pre- penance at the shrines in our way ? " 

sented themselves. EUena was hastily retreat- ' ' Doing penance on a festival, signor I They 

ing, when a weU-known voice re<aUed her, are more likely, by this time, to be taking 

and she perceived, by the rays of a half- down the ornaments." 

hooded lamp which Jeronimo held, Vivaldi. "That would be equally unfortunate for 

" Oh, Heavens I " he exclaimed, in a voice us," said Vivaldi ; "cannot we avoid the 

tremulous with joy, as he took her hand, church, father?" 

" is it possible that you are again my own ! Jeronimo assured him that tlus was im- 

If you could but know what I have suffered possible ; and they immediately entered one 

during this last hour i " Then observing of its lonely aisles, where he unhooded the 

OUvia, he drew back, tiU EUena expressed lamp, for the tapers, which had given splen- 

her deep sense of obUgation to the nun. dour at an earUer hour to the numerous 

" We have no time to lose, "said Jeronimo, i^rines, had expired, except those at the high 

suUenly ; "we have stayed too long already, altar, which were so remote that their rays 

as you wiU find, perhaps." faded into twiUght long before they reached 

"FareweU,dear EUena! "said Olivia; "may the part of the church where the fugitives 

the protection of Heaven never leave you 1 passed. Here and there, indeed, a dying 

The fears of EUena now gave way to lamp shot a tremulous gleam upon the smine 

affectionate sorrow, as,weeping on the bosom below, and vanished again, serving to mark 

of the nun, she said " FareweU 1 oh, farewell, the distances in the long perspective of arches 

nj/r tfear, my tender Aiead I I must nevefi rathec thaA \o enUghten the gloomy solitude ; 



THB ITAUAN, 6j 

but no sound, not even of a whisper, stole become of the lady ? But all this you knew 

along the pavement. before, signor ; and were willing rnough to 

They crossed to a side door communicating trust me then . The passage wc are entering 

with the court, and with the rock which en- opens upon the clifls, at some distance. I 

s^uiiQdibAimdcg^oi Our Lady of Mount Car- have run hazard enough already, and will 

mel. There the sudden glare of tapers waste no more time ; so if you do not choose 

issuing from the cave alarmed the fugitives, to go forward, I will leave you, and you may 

who had b^^n to retreat, when Jeronimo, act as you please." 

stepping forward to examine the place, assiu-ed He concluded with a laugh of derision, and 

them there was no symptom of any person was re-locking the door, when Vivaldi, 

being within, and that lights burned day and alarmed for the probable consequcoce of his 

night around the shrine. resentment and somewhat reassured by the 

Revived by this explanation, they followed indifference he discovered as to their pursuing 

into the cave, where their conductor opened the avenue or not, endeavoured to appease 

a part of the wire-work enclosing the saint, him, as well as to encourage EUcna ; and he 

and led them to the extremity of the vault, succeeded in both. 

sunk deep within which appeared a small As he followed in silence through the 

door. While Ellena trembled with apprc- gloomy passage, his doubts were, however, 

hension, Jeronimo applied a key, and they not so wholly vanquished but that he was 

perceived, beyond the door, a narrow passage prepared for attack, and while he supported 

winding away into the rock. The monk was Ellena with one hand, he held his sword in 

leading on, but Vivaldi, who partook of the the other. 

suspicions of Ellena, paused at the entrance. The avenue was of considerable length, and 

and demanded whither he was conducting before they reached its extremity they heard 

them. music from a distance, winding along the 

"To the place of your ^^j/««<z//(7«," replied rocks. " Hark 1 " cried Ellena, "whence 

the brother, in a hollow voice ; an answer come those sounds ? Listen 1 " 

which alarmed Ellena, and did not satisfy "From the cave we have left," replied 

Vivaldi. "I have given myself to your Jeronimo, "audit is midnight by that ; it is 

guidance," he said, "and have confided to the last chaunt of the pilgrims at the shrine 

you what is dearer to me than existence, of our Lady. Make haste, signor ; I shall 

Yoiu: life," pointing to the short sword con- be called for." 

cealed beneath his pilgrim's vest, " your life, The fugitives now perceived that all re- 

you may rely upon my word, shall answer for treat was cut off, and that, if they had lingered 

your treachery. If your purpose is evil, pause a few moments longer in the cave, they should 

a moment, and repent, or you shall not quit have been siurprised by those devotees, some 

this passage alive.' one of whom, however, it appeared possible, 

"Do you menace me?" replied the brother, might wander into this avenue, and still in- 

his countenance darkening. " Of what ser- terrupt their escape. When Vivaldi told his 

vice would be my death to you? Do you apprehensions, Jeronimo, with an arch sneer, 

Imow that every brother in the convent would affirmed there was no danger of that, " for 

rise to avenge it? " the passage," he added, " is known only to 

" I know only that I will make sure of one the brothers of the convent." 

traitor, if there be one," said Vivaldi, " and Vivaldi's doubts vanished when he further 

defend this lady against your host of monks ; understood that the avenue led only from the 

and, since you also know this, proceed accord- cliffs without to the cave, and was used for 

ingly. " the purpose of conveying secretly to the shrine 

At this instant, it occurriog to Ellena that such articles as were judged necessary to cx- 

the passage in question probably led to the cite the superstitious wonder of the devotees, 

puson-chamber which Olivia had described While he proceeded in thoughtful silence, 

as situated within some deep recess of the a distant chime sounded hollowly through the 

convent, and that Jeronimo had certainly chambers of the rock. "The matin-bell 

betrayed them, she refused to go further. " If strikes I " said Jeronimo, in seeming alarm, 

your purpose is honest," said she, "why do "I am summoned. Signora, quicken your 

you not conduct us through some direct gate steps 1" an unnecessary request, for Ellena 

of the convent? why are we brought into already passed with her utmost speed; and 

these subterraneous labyrinths ? " she now rejoiced on perceiving a door in the 

"There is no direct gate but that of the remote winding of the passage, which she 
portal," Jeronimo replied, **and this is the believed would emancipate her from the con- 
only other avenue leading beyond the walls. " vent. But, as she advanced, the avenue 

"And why can we not go out through the appeared extending beyond it ; and the door, 

portal ? " Vivaldi asked. which stood a little open, allowed her a 

" Because it is beset with pilgrims and lay glimpse of a chamber in tha t\\«^ ^>\^^>i 

brothers," replied Jeronimo, "and though lighted. 

you tcd%\kipSiSB\h€in safely enough, what is io ViValdl, (iLaxtiked \>7 >]ti<& V^^v^ Vdl^\«^^ 



66 THk ITAUAN. 

when he had passed, whether anypeison was the chtnrch, to examine whether a possibility 
in the chamber, and received an equivocal remained of the fugitives passing unobserved 
answer from Jeronimo, who, however, soon to the great portsd ; and, having conducted 
after pointed to an arched gate that termi- them back to the chamber, of which they 
nated the avenue. They proceeded with had taken a passing glimpse, he proceeded 
lighter steps, for hope now cheered their to the shrine. 

hearts, and, on reaching the gate, all appre- For a considerable time after his departure 
hension vanished. Jeronimo gave the lamp they were not \vithout hope ; but, their con- 
to Vivaldi, while he began to unbar and im- fidence diminishing as his delay increased, 
lock the door, and Vivaldi had prepared to their uncertainty at length became terrible ; 
reward the brother for his fidelity, before they and it was only for the sake of Vivaldi, from 
perceived that the door refused to yield. A whom she scrupulously concealed all know- 
dreadful imagination seized on Vivaldi. Jero- ledge of the particular fate which she was 
nimo, turning round, coolly said, "I fear we aware must await her in the convent, that 
are betrayed ; the second lock is shot 1 I have EUena appeared to endure it with calmness, 
only the key of the first." Notwithstanding the plausibility of Jeronimo, 

'* We are betrayed," said Vivaldi in a reso- suspicion of his treachery returned upon hei 
lute tone ; • ' but do not suppose that your mind. The cold and earthy air of this 
dissimulation conceals you. I understand by chamber was like that of a sepulchre ; and 
whom we are betrayed. Recollect my late when she looked round, it appeared exactly 
assertion, and consider once more whether it to correspond with the description given by 
is your interest to intercept us." Olivia of the prison where the nun had 

" My signor," replied Jeronimo, " I do not languished and expired. It was walled and 
deceive you when I protest by our holy saint vaulted with the rock, and had only one 
that I have not caused this gate to be fastened, small grated aperture in the roof to admit air, 
and that I would open it if I could. The and contained no furniture, except one table, 
lock which holds it was not shot an hour ago. a bench, and the lamp, which dimly showed 
I am the more surprised at what has happened the apartment. That a lamp should be found 
because this place is seldom passed, even by burning in a place so remote and solitary, 
the holiest footstep : and I fear whoever has amazed her stiU more when she reooUectra 
passed now has been led hither by suspicion, the assertion of Jeronimo —that even holy 
and comes to intercept your flight." steps seldom passed this way ; and when she 

"Your wily explanation, brother, may serve considered also, that he had expressed no 
you for an inferior occasion, but not on this, " surprise at a circumstance, according to his 
replied Vivaldi ; "either, therefore, unclose own assertion, so unusual. Again it appeared 
the gate, or prepare for the worst. You are that she had been betrayed into the very 
not now to learn that, however slightly I may prison designed for her by the Abbess ; and 
estimate my own life, I will never abandon the horror occasioned by this supposition 
this lady to the horrors which your commu- was so great that she was on the point of 
nity have already prepared for her." disclosing it to Vivaldi ; but an apprehension 

Ellena, summoning her fleeting spirits, en- of the destruction into which his desperate 
deavoured to calm the indignation of Vivaldi, courage might precipitate him restrained her. 
and to prevent the consequence of his sus- While these considerations occupied Ellena, 
picions, as well as to prevail with Jeronimo to and it appeared that any certainty would be 
unfasten the gate. Her efforts were, how- less painful than this suspense, she frequently 
ever, followed by a long altercation ; but, at looked round the chamber in search of some 
length, the art or the innocence of the brother object which might contradict or confirm her 
appeased Vivaldi, who now endeavoured to suspicion that this was the death-room of 
force the gate, while Jeronimo in vain repre- the unfortunate nun. No such circumstance 
sented its strength, and the certain ruin that appeared, but as her eyes glanced with 
must fall upon himself if it should be dis- almost frenzied eagerness, she perceived 
covered that he had concurred in destroy- something shadowy in a remote comer of the 
ngit. floor; and, on approaching, discovered what 

The gate was immovable ; but, as no other seemed a dreadful hieroglyphic— a mattress 
chance of escaping appeared, Vivaldi was of straw, in which she thought she beheld 
not easily prevailed with to desist ; all possi- the death-bed of the miserable recluse ; nay, 
bility of retreating too was gone, since the more, that the impression it still retained was 
church and the cave were now crowded with that which her form had left there, 
devotees attending the matin service. While Vivaldi was yet entreating her ta 

Jeronimo, however, seemingly did not de- explain the occasion of the horror she be- 
spair of effecting their release, butheacknow- trayed, the attention of each was withdrawn 
ledged that they would probably be compelled by a hollow sigh that rose near them, 
to conceal themselves in this gloomy avenue Ellena caught unconsciously the arm of Vi- 
aU night, and perhaps the next day. At valdi, and ustened, aghast, for a return of 
Jea£tli it was agreed that be sbovdd return to the sound, but all remained stiU« 



\ 
\ 



THE ITALIAN, 



** It surely was not fimded I ** said Vivaldi, 
after a long pause ; "you heird it also 1 " 

"Ididr* replied Ellcna. 

' ' It was a sigh, was it not ? " he added. 

" Oh, yes, and such a sigh 1 " 

"Some person is concealed near us," ob- 
soired Vivaldi, looking round ; "but be not 
alarmed, Ellena ; I have a sword." 

" A sword 1 alas I you know not But 

hark I there, again ! " 

That was very near us 1 " said Vivaldi. 
"This lamp bums so sickly I "—and he held it 
high, endeavouring to penetrate the furthest 
gloom of the chamber. " Hah 1 who goes 
there ? " he cried, and stepped suddenly for- 
ward ; but no person app^red, and a silence, 
as of the tomb, returned. 

" If you are in sorrow, speak 1 " Vivaldi at 
length said ; "from fellow -sufferers you will 
meet with ^mpathy . If your designs are evil 
— tremble, for you shall find I am desperate." 

Still no answer was returned, and he car- 
ried forward the lamp to the opposite end of 
the chamber, where he perceived a small 
door in the rock. At the same instant he 
heard, from within, a low tremulous sound, 
as of a person in prayer or in agony. He 
pressed against the door, which, to his sur- 
prise, yielded immediately, and discovered a 
figure kneeling before a crucifix, with an 
attention so wholly engaged as not to ob- 
serve the presence of a stranger till Vivaldi 
spoke. The person then rose from his 
Imees, and turning, showed the silvered 
temples and pale features of an aged 
monk. The mild and sorrowful character of 
the countenance, and the lambent lustre of 
eyes which seemed still to retain somewhat 
of the fire of genius, interested Vivaldi, and 
encouraged Ellena. who had followed him. 

An umiffected surprise appeared in the air 
of the monk ; but Vivaldi, notwithstanding 
the interesting benignity of his countenance, 
feared to answer his inquiries, till the father 
hinted to him that an explanation was 
necessary even to his own safety. Encouraged 
by his manner, rather than intimidated by 
this hint, and perceiving that his situation 
was desperate, Vivaldi confided to the friar 
some partial knowledge of his embarrassment. 

While he spoke, the father listened with 
deep attention, looked with compassion alter- 
nately upon him and Ellena : and some 
harassing objection seemed to contend with 
the pity which urged him to assist the 
strangers. He inquired how long Jeronimo 
had been absent, and shook his head signifi- 
cantly when he learned that the gate of the 
avenue was fastened by a double lock. "You 
are betrayed, my children " said he; "you 
have trusted with the simplicity of youth, and 
the cunning of age has deceived you." 

This teidble conviction affected Ellena to 
tears ; and Vivaldi, scarcely able to command 
the indignation^ y/hich a view of such 



treachery excited, was unable to offer her any 
consolation. 

" You, my daughter, I remember to have 
seen in the church this morning, " obsen'ed 
the friar. " I remember, too, that you pro- 
tested against the vows you were brought 
thither to seal. Alas ! my child, were you 
aware of the oonsequence of such a proci-cd- 
ing?" 

" I had only a choice of evils," Ellena 
replied. 

"Holy father," said Vivaldi, "I will not 
t)elieve that you are one of those who either 
assisted in or approved the persecution of 
innocence. If you were acquainted with the 
misfortunes of this lady, you would piiy and 
save her, but there is now no time for detail ; 
and I can only conjure you, bv every sacred 
consideration, to assist her to leave tlic con- 
vent. If there were leisure to inform you of 
the unjustifiable means which have been 
employed to bring her within these walls— if 
you knew that she was taken, an orphan, 
from her home at midnight— that armed 
ruffians brought her hitlier — and at the com- 
mand of strangers —that she has not a single 
relation surviving to assert her right of inde- 
pendence, or reclaim her of her persecutors. 

Oh ! holy £ather, if you knew all this " 

Vivaldi was unable to proceed. 

The friar again regarded Ellena with com- 
passion, but still in thoughtful silence. "All 
this may be very true," at length he said, 
«« but "and he hesitated. 

"I understand you, father," said Vivaldi — 
"you require proof; but how can proof be 
adduced here? You must lely upon the 
honour of my word. And, if you are inclined 
to assist us, it must be immediately I — while 
you hesitate, we are lost. Even now I think I 
hear the footsteps of Jeronimo." 

He stepped softly to the door of the cham- 
ber, but all was yet still. The friar, too, 
listened, but he also deliberated : while 
Ellena, with a look of eager supplication and 
terror, awaited his decision . 

"No one is approaching," said Vivaldi, 
"it is not yet too late !— Good father ! if you 
would serve us, despatch." 

" Poor innocent 1 " said the friar, half to 
himself, "in this chamber — in this fatal 
place " 

" In this chamber 1 " exclaimed Ellena, 
anticipating his meaning. "It was in this 
chamber, then, that a nmi was suffered to 
perish ; and I, no doubt, am conducted 
hither to undergo a similar fate i " 

" In this chamber ! " re-echoed Vivaldi, in 
a voice of desperation. " Holy father, if you 
are indeed disposed to assist us, let us act 
this instant ; the next, perhaps, may render 
your best intentions unavailing." 

The friar, who had regarded Elletv^. ^VsxVt 
she mentioned l\ve nviiv >n\\^v nJcv^ mJotvo^x. 
surprise, now ViilVidteNii )Q\s«X\.<ixv\\o\v\ ^i«« 



68 THE ITALIAN. 

fWs fell on h!s cheek, but he hastily dried ordered Paulo to wait with the horses, when, 

them, and seemed struggling to overcome on turning an angle of the convent wall, they 

some grief that was deep in his heart. perceived a long train of pilgrims issuing 

Viv^di, finding that entreaty had no power forth from the portal at a little distance, 
to hasten his decision, and expecting every Vivaldi drew back ; yet, dreading eveiy 
moment to hear the approach of Jeronimo, moment that he lingered near the monastery 
paced the chamber in agonising perturbation, to hear the voice of Jeronimo or other persons 
now pausing at the door to listen, and then from the avenue, he was sometimes inclined 
calling, though almost hopelessly, upon the to proceed at any hazard. The only prac- 
humanity of the friar ; while Ellena, looking ticable path leading to the base of the moun- 
round the room in shuddering horror, re- tain, however, was now occupied by these 
peatedly exclaimed, ' ' On this very spot ! in devotees, and to mingle with them was little 
this very chamber 1 Oh, what sufferings less than certain destruction. A bright moon- 
have these walls witnessed! what are they light showed distinctly every figure that moved 
yet to witness ! " in the scene, and the fugitives kept within 

Vivaldi now endeavoured to soothe the the shadow of the walls, till, warned by an 

spirits of Ellena, and again urged the friar to approaching footstep, they crossed to the feet 

employ this critical moment in saving her. of the clififs that rose beyond some palmy 

*' Oh, heaven ! " said he, " if she is now dis- hillocks on the right, whose dusky recesses 

covered her fate is certain ! " promised a temporary shelter. As they passed 

" I dare not say what that fate would be," with silent steps along the winding rocks, the 

interrupted the father, "or what my own, tranquillity of the landsc£^ below afiforded 

should I consent to assist you ; but, though an affecting contrast with the tumult and 

I am old, I have not quite forgotten to feel alarm of their minds. 

for others. They may oppress the few re- Being now at some distance from the monas- 
maining years of my age, but the blooming tery, they rested under the shade of the clifis 
days of youth should flourish ; and they shall till the procession of devotees, which was 
flourish, my children, if my power can aid traced descending among the thiclcets and hoi- 
you. Follow me to the gate ; we will see lows of the mountain, shoidd be sufficiently 
whether my key cannot unfasten all the locks remote. Often they looked back to the con- 
that hold it." vent, expecting to see lights issue from the 

Vivaldi and Ellena immediately followed avenue or the portal, and attended in mute 

thefeeblestepsof the old man, who frequently anxiety for the siUlen murmurs of pursuit ; 

stopped to listen whether Jeronimo or any of but none came on the breeze,^ nor did any 

the brothers, to whom the latter might have gleaming lamp betray the steps of a spy. 

betrayed Ellena's situation, were approaching ; Released, at length, from immediate appre- 

but not an echo wandered along the lonely hension, Ellena listened to the matin-hymn 

avenue till they reached the gate, when dis- of the pilgrims, as it came upon the still air 

tant footsteps beat upon the ground. and descended towards the cloudless heavens. 

"They are approaching, father, "whispered Not a sound mingled with the holy strain, 

Ellena. ' ' Oh, if the key should not open and even in the measured pause of voices 

these locks instantly, we are lost ! Hark ! only the trembling of the foliage above was 

now I hear their voices— they call upon my distinguished. The responses, as they 

name ! Already they have discovered we have softened away in distance, and swelled again 

left the chamber." on the wasting breeze, appeared like the 

While the friar, with trembling hands, ap- music of spirits, watching by night upon the 

plied the key, Vivaldi endeavoured at once to summits of the mountains, and answerinp^ 

assist him and to encourage Ellena. each other in celestial airs, as they walk their 

The locks gave way, and the gate opened high boundary and overlook the sleeping 

at once upon the moonlight mountains. El- world. 

lena heard once more, with the joy of liberty, " How often, Ellena, at this hour," said 

the midnight breeze passing among the pen- Vivaldi, " have I lingered round your dweU- 

sile branches of the palms that loftily over- ing, consoled by the consciousness of being 

shadowed a rude platform before the gate, near you 1 Within those walls, I have said, 

and rustling with fainter sound among the she reposes ; they enclose my world ; all with- 

pendent shrubs of the surrounding clifite. out is to me a desert. Now, I am in your 

"There is no leisure for thanks, my children," presence I Oh, Ellena! now that you are 

said the friar, observing they were about to once more restored to me, suffer not the 

speak. •' I will fasten the gate, and endeavour caprice of possibility again to separate us ! 

to delay your pursuers, that you may have Let me lead you to the first altar that wiU 

time to escape. My blessing go with you." confirm our vows." 

Ellena and Vivaldi had scarcely a moment Vivaldi forgot, in the anxiety of a stronger 

to bid him "farewell" before he closed the interest, the delicate silence he had resolved 

door, and Vivaldi, taking her arm, was to impose upon himself till EUcna should be 

hastenJD^^ towards the spot wherb he had in a place of safety. 



THE ITALIAN. 



«9 



" This is not a moment," she replied, with 
hesitation, "for conversation. Our situation 
is yet perilous ; we tremble on the very brink 
of danger." 

Vivaldi immediately rose . " Into what 
imminent danger," said he, "had my selfish 
folly nearly precipitated you ! We are linger* 
ing in this alarming neighbourhood, wnen 
that feeble strain indicates the pilgrims to 
be sufficiently remote to permit us to pro- 
ceedl" 

As he spoke, they descended cautiously 
among the cli£&, often looking back to the 
convent, where, however, no hght appeared; 
exc^t what the moon shed over the spires 
and tall windows of its cathedral. For a 
moment, EUena fsmcied she saw a taper in 
her favourite turret, and a belief that the nuns, 
perhaps the abbess herself, were searching 
for her there, renewed lier terror and her 
speed. But the rajrs were only those of the 
moon striking through opposite casements 
of the chamber ; and the fugitives reached 
the base of the mountain without further 
alarm, where Paulo appeared with horses. 
" Ah ! signor m/^," said the servant, " I am 
glad to see you alive and merry ; I began to 
fear, by the length of your stay, that the 
monks had dapped you up to do penance for 
life. How glad I am to see you, maestro I 

" Not more so than I am to see vou, good 
Paulo. But where is the pilgrims cloak I 
bade you provide ?" 

Paulo displayed it, and Vivaldi having 
wrai^)ed it round Ellena, and placed her on 
horseback, they took the road towards Naples, 
Ellena designing to take refuge in tlie Convent 
della Pieta. Vivaldi, however, apprehendinjgf 
that their enemies would sedc them on this 
road, proposed leaving it as soon as prac- 
ticable, suid reaching the neighbourhood of 
Villa Altieri by a circuitous way. 

Thw soon after axrived at the tremendous 
pass through which Ellena had approached 
the monastery, and whose horrors were con- 
siderably heightened at this dusky hour, for 
the moonlight fell only partially upon the 
deep barriers of the defile, and frequently the 
precipice, with the road on its brow, was 
entirely shadowed by other cliffs and woody 
points that rose above it. But Paulo, whose 
spirits seldom owned the influence of local 
scenery, jogged merrily along, frequently con- 
gratulating himself and his master on their 
escape, and carolling briskly to the echoes of 
the rocks, till Vivaldi, apprehensive for the 
consequence of this loud gaiety, desired him 
to desist. 

"Ah, signor mio I I must obey you," said 
he, " but my heart was never so full in my 
life ; and I would fain sing to unburden it of 
some of its joy. That scrape we got into in 
the dungeon there, at what's the name of the 
place ? was bad enough, but it was nothing to 
this, because here I was left out of it ; and 



you, maestrot might have been murdered 
again and again, while I, thinking of nothing 
at all, was quietly airing myself on the moun- 
tain by moonlight. 

"But what is that vonder in the sky, si- 
gnor ? It looks for all the world like a bridge ; 
only it is perched so high that nobody would 
think of building one in such an out-of-the- 
way place, unless td cross from doud to 
cloud, mudi less would taJce the trouble of 
clambering up after it, for the pleasure of 
goixig over." 

Vivaldi looked forward, and Ellena per- 
ceived the Alpine bridge she had formerly 
crossed with so much alarm in the moonlight 
perspective, airily suspended between tremen- 
dous cliSs, with the river far below, tumbling 
down the rocky chasm. One of the support- 
ing cli£&, with part of the bridge, was in 
deep shade, but the other, feathered with 
foliage, and the rising surges at its foot, were 
strongly illumined ; and many a thicket, wet 
with the spray, sparkled in contrast to the 
dark rock it overhung. Beyond the arch the 
long-drawn prospect faded into misty light. 

" Well, to be sure 1 "exclaimed Pauk>, " to 
see what ciuiosity will do 1 If there are not 
some people have found their way up to the 
bridge already." 

Vivaldi now perceived figures upon the 
slender arch, and, as their indistinct forms 
glided into the moonshine, other emotions 
than those of wonder disturbed him, lest 
these might be pilgrims going to the shrine of 
our Lady and who would give information of 
his route. No possibility, however, appeared 
of avoiding them, for the predpices that rose 
immediately above, and fell bdow, forbade 
all excm-sion, and the road itself was so nar- 
row, as scarcely to admit of two horses passing 
each other. 

"Thev are all off the bridge now, and 
without having broken thdr necks, perhaps 1 " 
said Paulo ; " where, I wonder, will they go 
next ! Why, surely, signor, this road does 
not lead to the bridge yonder ; we are not 
going to pick our way in the air too. The 
roar of these waters has made my head dizzy 
already ; and the rocks here are as dark as 
midnight, and seem ready to tumble upon 
one ; they are enough to make one despair to 
look at them. You need not have checked my 
mirth, signor." 

" I would fain check your loquacity," re- 
plied Vivaldi. "Do, good Paulo, be silent 
and circumspect ; those people may be near 
us, though we do not yet see them." 

•* The road does lead to the bridge then, - 
signor," said Paulo, dolorously. " And see, 
there they are again, winding round that cliflF, 
and coming towards us." 

"Hush, they are pilgrims," whispered 
Vivaldi ; " we will linger under the shade of 
these rocks while Ihe^ '^^JSi^. '^'wcv^xcJa^t, 
Paulo, that a smg\^ mCckact^^X h«w^ isca.-jXsfe 



yo THE ITALIAN. 

fatal ; and that if they hail us, I alone am to "Are you returning from the shrine of 

answer." Our Lady? " said one of them. 

" You are obeyed, signor." Vivaldi, startled by the voice, looked 

The fugitives drew up close under the clilfs, round, and demanded who asked the question. 

and proceeded slowly, while the words of "A brother pilgrim," replied tlie man; 

the devotees, as tliey advanced, became "one who has toiled up these steep rocks 

audible. till his limbs will scarcely bear him further. 

" It gives one some comfort," said Paulo, Would that you would take compassion on 

" to hear cheerful voices in such a place as him, and give him a ride." 

this. Bless their merry hearts 1 theirs seems However compassionate Vivaldi might bo 

a pilgrimage of pleasure ; but they will be to the sufferings of others, this was not a 

demure enough, I warrant, by-and-by. I moment when he could indulge his disposition 

^vish I " without endangering the safety of Ellena ; 

" Paulo, have you so soon forgot?" said and he even fancied the stranger spoke in a 

Vivaldi, shajply. voice of dissimulation. His suspicions were 

The devotees, on perceiving the travellers, strengthened when the traveller, not repulsed 
became suddenly silent ; till he who appeared by a refusal, inquired the way he was going, 
to be the father-director, as they passed, and proposed to join his party. " For these 
said "Hail 1 in the name of Our Lady of mountains, they say, are infested with ban- 
Mount Carmell" and they repeated the ditti," he added, "jind a large company is 
salutation in chorus. less likely to be attacked than a small one." 

"Hail!" rephed Vivaldi; "the first mass "If you are so very w^uy, my friend," 

is over, " and he passed on. said Vii^di, ' ' how is it possible you can keep 

" But if you make haste you may come in pace with our horses? though I acknowledge 

for the second/' said Paulo, jogging after. you have done wonders in overtaking them.'* 

"You have just left the shrine, then?" "The fear of these banditti," replied the 

said one of the party, " and can tell us " stranger, " urged us on." 

"Poor pilgrims, like yourselves," replied "You have nothing to apprehend from 

Paulo, " and can tell as little. Good morrow, robbers," said Vivaldi, "if you will only 

fathers ; yonder peeps the dawn." moderate your pace ; for a large company of 

He came up with his master, who had pilgrims are on the road, who will soon over- 
hurried forward with Ellena, and who now take you." 

severely reproved his indiscretion ; while the He then put an end to the conversation by 

voices of the Carmelites, singing the matin- clapping spurs to his horse, and the strangers 

hymn, sank away among the rocks, and the were soon left far behind. The inconsistency 

quietness of solitude returned. of their complaints with their ability, and the 

"Thank heaven, we are quit of this ad- whole of their manner, were serious subjects 

venture." said VivaJdi. of alarm to the fugitives ; but when they had 

" And now we have only the bridge to get lost sight of them, they lost also their appre- 

over," rejoined Paulo, '* and I hope we shall hensions ; and having at length eme^ied 

all be safe." from the pass, they quitted the high road to 

They were now at the entrance of it. As Naples, and struck into a solitaxy one that led 

they passed the trembling planks, and looked westw^?d towards Aquila. 

up the defile, a party of people appeared ad- «__ 

vancing on the road the fugitives had left, r-r.TATj'ri?© vttt 

and a chorus of other voices than those of CHAPTER XIII. 

the Carmelites were heard mingling with the T^ROM the summit of a mountain the 

hollow sound of the waters. -^ morning light showed the travellers the 

Ellena, again alarmed, hastened iorward, distant lake of Celano, gleaming at the feet 

and Vivaldi, though he endeavoured to ap- of other lofty mountains of the Apennine far 

pease her apprehension of pursuit, encoiu*agcd in the south. Thither Vivaldi judged it pru- 

her speed. dent to direct his course, for the lake lay so 

"These are nothing but more pilgrims, remote from the immediate way to Naples, 

signora," said Paulo, "or they would not and from the neighbourhood of San Stetano, 

send such loud shouts before them ; they that its banks promised a secure retreat. He 

must needs think we can hear." considered, also, that among the convents 

The travellers proceeded as fast as the scattered along those delightfiil banks might 

broken road would permit, and were soon easily be found a priest who would solemnize 

beyond the reach of the voices ; but as Paulo their nuptials, should Ellena consent to an 

turned to look whether the party was within immediate marriage. 

sight, he perceived two persons, wrapped in The travellers descended among olive 

cloaks, advancing under the brow of the woods, and soon after were directed by some 

cliffs, and within a few paces of his horse's peasants at work into a road that leads from 

lieels. Before he could give notice to his Aquila to the town of Celano, one of the 

master, they were at his side. very few roads which intrude among the wild 



THE ITAUAN. 



n 



mountains that on eveiy side sequester the delicacy, the degradation, of intruding herself 
lake. As they approached the low grounds into his family ; a family, too, from whom she 
the scent of orange blossoms breathed upon had not only received proofs of strong disUke, 



the morning air, and the spicy myrtle sent 
forth all its fragrance from among the clifib 
which it thickly tufted. Bowers of lemon 
and orange si^ead along the valley, and 
among the cabins of the peasants who culti- 



but had suffered terrible injustice and been 
menaced with still severer cruelty. These 
latter circumstances, however, released her 
from all obligations of delicacy or generosity, 
so far as concerned only the authors of her 



vated them Vivaldi hoped to obtain repose sufiering ; and she had now bat to consider 

and refreshment for Ellena. the happiness of Vivaldi and herself. Yet 

The cottages, however, at which Paulo she could not deckle thus precipitately on a 

inqoired were unoccupied, the owners being subject which so solemnly involved the fortune 

all gone forth to thdr labour : and tlie tra- of her whole life ; nor forbear 



vellers, again ascending, found themselves 
soon after among mountains inhabited by the 
flodcs, where the scent of the orange was 
exchanged for the aromatic perfrune of the 
pasturage. 

"Mysignor," said Paulo, "is not that a 
shepherd's horn sounding at a distance? If 
so, the signora may yet obtain some refresh- 
ment." 

While Vivaldi listened, a liautboy and a 
pastoral drum were heard considerably 
neam*. 



reminding 
Vivaldi, aflFectionately, gratefully, as she loved 
him, of the circumstances which withheld 
her decision. 

" Tell me yourself," added she, " whether 
I ought to g^ve my hand, while your family 

—your mother " She paused, and blushed. 

and Inirst into tears. 

•' Spare me the view of those tears," said 
Vivaldi, "and a recollection of the circum- 
stances that excite them. Oh, let me not 
think of my mother, while I see you weep 1 
Let me not remember that her injustice and 



They fcAowed the sound over the turf, and cruelty destined you to perpetual sorrow ! " 



came within view of a cabin, sheltered from 
tihe sun by a tuft of almond trees. It was a 
dairy-cabin belonging to some shepherds, 
who at a diort distance were watching their 
flocks, and^ stretched beneath the sliade of 
chestnuts, were amusing themselves by play- 
ing upon these rural instruments : a scene of 
Arcadian manners frequent at this day upon 



Vivaldi's features became agitated while ho 
spoke ; he rose, paced the room with quick 
steps, and then quitted it and walked under 
the shade of the trees in front of the cabin. 

In a few moments, however, he commanded 
his emotion and returned. Again he placed 
himself on the bench beside Ellena, and taking 
her hand, said solemnly, and in a voice of 



the mountains of Abmzzo. The simplicity extreme sensibility, ' ' Ellena, you have long 
of their appearance, approaching to wlldness, witnessed how dear you are to me ; you can- 
was tempoed by a hospitable spirit. A vener- not doubt my love ; you have long since also 
able man, the chief shepherd, advanced to promised, solemnly promised, in the presence 
meet the strangers, and learning their vmnts, of her who is now no more, but whose spirit 
conducted &em into his cool cabin, where may even at this moment look down upon us, 
cream, cheese made of goat's milk, honey — of her, who bequeathed you to my ten- 
extracted from the delicious herbage of the derest care — to be mine for ever. By these 
mountains, and dried figs, were quicklyplaced sacred truths, by these affecting recollections 1 
before them. I conjure you, abandon me not to despair, 
Ellena, overcome with the fatigue of anxiety, nor, in the energy of a just resentment, 
rather thtam that of travelling, retired, when sacrifice the son to the cruel and mistaken 
she had taJcen breakfast, for an hour's repose, policy of the mother i You, nor I, can con- 
wliile Vivaldi rested on the bench before the jecture the machinations which may be 
cottage, and Paulo, keeping watch, discussed spread for ns, when it shall be known that 
his breakfast, together with the circumstances you have left San Stefano. If we delay to 



of the late alarm, under the shade of the 
almond trees. 

When Ellena again appeared, Vivaldi pro- 
posed that they should rest here during the 
intense heat of the day ; and, since he now 
considered her to be in a place of temporary 
safety, he ventured to renew the subject 
neatest his heart ; to represent the evils that 
might overtake them, and to urge an im- 
mediate solemnisation of their marriage. 

Thoughtful and dejected, Ellena attended 
for some time in silence to the arguments and 
pleadings of Vivaldi. She secretly acknow- 
ledged the justness of his representations, but 
she shftmk, more than evtr, from the in- 



exchange our vows, I know, and I feel—that 
you are lost to me for ever 1 " 

Ellena was affected, and for some moments 
unable to reply. At length, drying her tears, 
she said tenderly, " Resentment can have no 
influence on my conduct towards you ; I 
think I feel none towards the Marchesa— for 
she is your mother. But pride, insulted 
pride, has a right to dictate, and ought to 
be obeyed ; and the time is now, perhaps, 
arrived when, if I would respect myself, I 
must renounce you " 

• ' Renoimce me I " interrupted VWaUdi^ 
"renounce me\ ^nd \s W, v\vwi, ^^^-Wva 
you could reuouace m^"^" ^i<& le^-a-Vt^^Xfl* 



72 



THE ITALIAN, 



eyes still fixed upon her face with eagerness 
and consternation. * ' Tell me at once, Ellena, 
is it possible ? " 

" 1 fear it is not," she replied. 

"You fear, alas! if you fear^ it is too 
possible, and I have lost you already ! Say, 
oh, say but that ^oa hopt it is not, and I, 
too, will hope again ! " 

The anguish with which he uttered this 
awakened all her compassion, and« forgetting 
the reserve she had imposed upon herself, 
and every half-formed resolution, she said, 
with a smile of ineffable sweetness, " I will 
neither fear nor hope in this instance : I will 
obey the dictates of gratitude, of affection, 
and will believe that I never can renounce 
you, while you are unchanged. " 

•'Believe I" repeated Vivaldi, "wiU you 
only believe? And why that mention of 
gratitude? and why that unnecessary reser- 
vation ? Yet even this assurance, feebly as it 
sustains my hopes, is extorted ; you see my 
misery, and from pity, from gratitude^ not 
affection, would assuage it. Besides, you 
will neither fear nor hope. Ah, Ellena 1 did love 
ever exist yet without fear, and without hope? 
Oh, never, never ! I fear and hope with such 
rapid transition ; every assurance, every look 
of yours, gives such force either to the one or 
the other, that I suffer unceasing anxiety. 
Why, too, that cold, that heart-breaking 
mention of gratitude ? No. Ellena, it is too 
certain that you do not love me I My 
mother's cruelty has estranged your heart 
from me 1 " 

" How much you mistake ! " said Ellena. 
' ' You have already received sacred testimonies 
of my regard ; if you doubt their sincerity, 
pardon me if I so far respect myself as to 
forbear entreating you will believe them." 

" How calm, how indifferent, how circum- 
spect, how prudent ! " exclaimed Vivaldi in 
tones of mournful reproach. '• But I will not 
distress you ; forgive me for renewing this 
subject at this time. It was my intention to 
be silent till you should have reached a place 
of more permanent security than this ; but 
how was it possible, with such anxiety pressing 
upon ray heart, to persevere in that design ? 
And what have I gained by departing from 
it ? increase of anxiety, of doubt, of fear ! " 

" Why will you persist in such self-inflic- 
tions ? " said Ellena. * ' I cannot endure that 
you should doubt my affection, even for a 
moment. And how can you suppose it 
possible that I ever can become insensible of 
yours : that I can ever forget the imminent 
danger you have voluntarily incurred for my 
release ; or, remembering it, can cease to feel 
the warmest gratitude ? 

"That is the very word which tortures me 

beyond all others ! " said Vivaldi. " Is it, 

then, only a sense of obligation you own for 

me ? Oh I rather say you hate me than 

suffer me to deceive my hopes with assurances 



of a sentiment so cold, so circumscribed, so 
dutiful as that of gratitude ! " 

"With me the word has a very different 
acceptation," replied Ellena, smiling. " I 
understand it to imply all that is tender and 
generous in affection ; and the sense of duty 
which you say it includes is one of the 
sweetest and most sacred feelings of the 
human heart." 

"Ah, Ellena! I am too willing to be de- 
ceived to examine your definition rigorously; 
yet I believe it is your smile, rather than tne 
accuracy of your explanation, that persuades 
me to a confidence in your affection ; and I 
will trust that the gratitude you feel is thus 
tender and comprehensive. But, I beseech 
you. name the word no more ! Its sound is 
like the touch of the Torpedo; 1 perceive my 
confidence chilled even while I listen to my 
own pronunciation of it." 

The entrance of Paulo interrupted the con- 
versation, who, advancing widi an air of 
mystery and alarm, said in a low voice, 

"Signorl as I kept watch under the 
almond trees, who should I see mounting op 
the road from the valley yonder, but the two 
bare-footed Carmelites, that overtook us in 
the pass of Chiari 1 I lost them again behind 
the woods, but I daresay they are coming 
this way ; for, the moment they spy out this 
dairy-hut, they will guess someUiing good is 
to be had here ; and the shepherds would be- 
lieve their flocks would all die, if " 

" I see them at this moment emerging from 
the woods," said Vivaldi, "and now they 
are leaving the road and crossmg this way. 
Where is our host, Pftulo ? " 

" He is without, at a little distance, signor. 
Shall I call him?" 

'*Yes." repUed Vivaldi, "or, stay; I wiU 
call him myself. Yet, if they see me " 

"Aye, signor ; or, for that matter, if they 
see me I But we cannot help ourselves now ; 
for if we call the host, we shall betray our- 
selves, and, if we do not call him, he will be- 
tray us ; so they must find us out, be it as it 
may." 

" Peace ! peace 1 let me think a moment," 
said Vivaldi. While Vivaldi undertook to 
think, Paulo was peeping about for a hiding 
place, if occasion should reauire one. 

" Call our host immediately," said Vivaldi, 
" I must speak with him." 

" He passes the lattice at this instant," 
observed Ellena. 

Paulo obeyed, and the shepherd entered 
the cabin. 

" My good friend," said Vivaldi, " I must 
entreat that you will not admit those friars, 
whom you see coming this way, nor suffer 
them to know what guests 3rou have. They 
have been very troublesome to us already 
on the road ; I will reward you for any loss 
their sudden departure may occasion you." 

" Nay, for that matter, friend," said Paulo, 



THE ITALIAN, 



73 



" it is thdr visit only that can occasion you 
loss, begging the signor's pardon ; their de- 
parture never occasioned loss to anybody. 
And to tell you the truth, for my master will 
not speak out» we were obliged to look pretty 
3har{dv about us while they bore us company, 
or we nave reason to think our pockets would 
have been the lighter. They are designing 
people, friend, take my word for it ; banditti, 
perhaps, in cUsguise. The dress of a Car- 
melite would suit their purpose, at this time 
of the pi^rimage. So be pretty blunt with 
them, if they want to come in here ; and you 
will do wdl, when they go, to send somebody 
to watch which way tney take, and see them 
clear off, or you may lose a stray lamb; 
perhaps." 

The old shepherd lifted up his eyes and 
hands, "To see how the world goes t " said 
he. "But thank you, maestro, for your 
warning : they shall not come within my 
threshold, for all their holy seeming, and it s 
the first time in my life I ever said nay to one 
of their garb, and mine has been a pretty long 
one, as you may guess, perhaps, by my face. 
How old, signor, should you take me to be? 
I warrant you will guess short of the matter 
though ; for on these high moimtains " 

"I will guess when you have dismissed 
the travellert," said Vivaldi, "after having 
given them some hasty refreshment without ; 
they must be almost at the door by this time. 
Despatch, friend." 

" If they should &ill foul upon me, for re- 
fusing them entrance," said the shepherd, 
" you will come out to help me, signor ? for 
my lads are at some distance. " 

Vivaldi assured him that they would, and 
he left the cabin. 

Paulo ventured to peep at the lattice, on 
what might be going forward without. ' • They 
are gone roimd to the door, signor, I fancy," 
said he, "for I see nothing of them this way. 
If there was but another window ! What 
foolish people to build a cottage with no 
window near the door ! But I must listen. " 

He stepped on tiptoe to the door, and 
bent his h^id in attention. 

" They are certainly spies from the mon- 
astery," observed Ellena to Vivaldi, "they 
follow us so closely ! If they were pilgrims, 
it is improbable, too, that their way should lie 
through this unfrequented region, and still 
more so that they should not travel in a 
larger party. When my absence was dis- 
covered, these people were sent, no doubt, in 
pursuit of me ; and, having met the devotees 
whom we passed, they were enabled to follow 
our route." 

" We shall do well to act upon this sup- 
position," replied Vivaldi, "but, though I 
am inclined to believe them emissaries from 
San Stefano, it is not improbable that they 
are only QzxmtWtes returning to some con- 
vcBi on the Jake of CtIano» " 



"I cannot hear a syllable, signor," said 
Paulo. " Pray do listen yourself I and there 
is not a single chink in this door to afford one 
consolation. Well ! if ever I build a cottage 
there shall be a window near " 

" Listen 1 " said Vivaldi. 

" Not a single word, signor ! " cried Paulo 
after a pause, '* I do not even hear a voice ! 
But now I hear steps, and they are coming to 
the door, too ; they shall find it no easy 
matter to open it, though," he added, placing 
himself against it. " Ay, ay, you may knock, 
friend, till your arm aches, and kick and lay 
about you— no matter for that." 

"Silence! let us know who it is," said 
Vivaldi ; and the old shepherd's voice was 
heard without. 

"They are gone, signors," said he, "you 
may open the door." 

• ' Which way did they go ? " asked Vivaldi 
when the man entered. 

" I cannot say as to that, signor. because I 
did not happen to see them at all ; and I have 
been looking all about, too." 

"Why, I saw them myself, crossing this 
way from the wood yonder," said Paulo. 

" And there is nothing to shelter them from 
our view between the wood and this cottage, 
friend," added Vivaldi. " What can they 
have done with themselves ? " 

"For that matter, gone into the wood 
again, perhaps," said the shepherd. 

Paulo gave his master a significant look, 
and added, " It is likely enough, friend ; and 
you may depend upon it, they are lurking 
there for no good purpose. You will do well 
to send somebody to look after them ; your 
flocks will suffer for it else. Depend upon it 
they design no good." 

"We are not used to such sort of folks in 
these parts," replied the shepherd ; "but if 
they mean any harm they shall find we can 
help ourselves." As he spoke he took down 
a horn from the roof, and blew a shrill blast 
that made the mountains echo ; when imme- 
diately the younger shepherds were seen 
running from various quarters towards the 
cottage. 

" Do not be alarmed, friend," said Vivaldi ; 
" these travellers mean you no harm, I dare- 
say, whatever they may design against us. 
But, as I think them suspicious persons, and 
should not like to overtake them on the road, 
I will reward one of your lads if you will let 
him go a little way towards Celano, and ex- 
amine whether they are lurking on that route." 

The old man consented, and, when the 
shepherds came up, one of them received 
directions from Vivaldi. 

"And be sure you do not return till you 
have found them, " added Paulo. 

"No, master," replied \Vift X^'^, **;ixv"^\ 
will bring Ihem safe Yi^xe^ -^ovx Twa^j Nx>asX 
me." J. 

" If you do. tmud, 70\x\<V^ \pX^wx>M»A. 



74 



THE ITALIAN, 



broke for your trouble. You are only to dis- 
cover where they are, and to watch where 
they go," said Paulo. 

Vivaldi at length made the lad compre- 
hend what was required of him, and he de- 
parted, while the old shepherd went out to 
keep guard. 

The time of his absence was passed in 
various conjectures by the party in the cabin 
concerning the Carmelites. Vivaldi still in- 
clined to believe they were honest people 
returning from a pilgrimage, but PaiUo was 
decidedly against this opinion. "They are 
waiting for us on the road, you may depend 
upon it, signor," said the latter. '* You may 
be certain they have some great design in 
hand, or they would never have turned their 
steps from this dairy-house when once they 
had spied it ; and that they did spy it we are 
sure." 

" But if they have in hand the great de- 
sign you speak of, Paulo, " said Vivaldi, "it 
is probable that they have spied us also, by 
their taking this obscure road. Now it must 
have occurred to them, when they saw a 
dairy-hut in so solitary a region, that we 
might probably be found within — ^yet they 
have not examined. It appears, therefore, 
they have no design against us. What can 
you answer to this, Paulo? I trust the 
apprehensions of Signora di Rosalba are 
unfounded." 

" Why I do you suppose, signor, they 
would attack us when we were safe housed, 
and had these good shepherds to lend us a 
helping hand ? No, signor, they would not 
even have shown themselves if they could 
have h'.^lped it ; and being once sure we were 
here, they would skulk back to the woods 
and lurk for us in the road they knew we 
must go, since, as it happens, there is only 
one." 

"How is it possible," said EUena, "that 
they can have discovered us here, since they 
did not approach the cabin to inquire?" 

" They came near enough for their purpose, 
signora, I daresay ; and, if the truth were 
known, they spied my face looking at them 
through the lattice. " 

" Come, come," said Vivaldi, "you are an 
ingenious tormentor, indeed, Paulo. Do you 
suppose they saw enough of thy face last 
night by moonlight, in that dusky glen, to 
enable them to recollect it again at a distance 
of forty yards ? Revive, my EUena, I think 
every appearance is in our favour." 

"Would 1 could think so too l'* sdd she, 
with a sigh. 

"Oh ! for that matter, signora," rejoined 
Paulo, "there is nothing to be afraid of; they 
should find tough work of it, if they thought 
proper to attack us, lady." 

*' li js not an open attack that we have to 
fear, " replied EUena, "^buf f hey may surround 
us with their saares, aad defy resistance." 



However Vivaldi might accede to the truth 
of this remark, he woidd not appear to do bo ; 
but tried to laugh away her appre^ensioiis ; 
and Paulo was silenced for a while by a 
significant look from bis master. 

The shepherd's boy returned mudi sooner 
than they had expected, and he probably 
saved his time that he might spare his labour, 
for he brought no intdligence of the Ca^ 
melites. " I looked for them among the 
woods, along the roadside in the hollow yon- 
der, too," said the lad, "and then I mounted 
the hill further on, but I could see nothing 
of them far or near, nor of a single soul, ex- 
cept our goats, and some of them do stray 
wide enough sometimes ; they lead me a fine 
dance often. They sometimes, signor, have 
wandered as far as Monte Nuvola* yonder, 
and got to the top of it, up among the clouds, 
and the crags, where I should break my neck 
if I climbed ; and the rogues seemed to know 
it, too, for when they have seen me coming, 
scrambling up, puffing and blowing, they 
ceased their capering, and stood peeping over 
a crag so sly, and so quiet, it seemed as if 
they were laughing at me ; as much as to say, 
' Catch us if you can.' " 

Vivaldi, who during the latter part of this 
speech had been consulting with Ellena 
whether they should proceed on their way 
immediately, asked the boy some further 
questions concerning the Carmelites; and 
becoming convinced that they had either not 
taken the road to Celano, or, having taken it, 
were at a considerable distance, he proposed 
setting out. and proceeding leisurefy, ** For 
I have now little apprehension of these 
people," he added, "and a great deal lest 
night should overtake us before we reach the 
place of our destination, since the road is 
mountainous and wild, and further, we are 
not perfectly acquainted with it. 

Ellena approving the plan, they took leave 
of the good shepherd, who with difficulty 
was prevailed with to accept any recompense 
for his trouble, and who gave them some 
further directions as to the road ; and their way 
was long cheered by the sound of the tabor 
and the sweetness of the hautboy, wafted over 
the wild. 

When they descended into the woody hol- 
low mentioned by the boy, EUleoia sent forth 
many an anxious look beneath the deep 
shade ; while Paulo, sometimes silent, and 
at others whistling and singing loudly, as if 
to overcome his fears, peeped under every 
bough that crossed the road, expecting to 
discover his friends, the Carmelites, lurking 
within its gloom. 

Having emerged from this valley, the road 
lay over mountains covered with flocks ; for it 
was now the season when they had quitted the 
plains of Apulia, to feed upon the herbage for 
which this resL^ou is celebrated ; and it was 
near autit^i, vfVi<^xit tx^m «^ voraiBix \a ^wXs&ijg^ 



fHR hAUAN. 75 

the travellers had long been ascending, the Paulo," said Vivaldi, smiling at this stroke 
whole lake of Celano, with its vast circle of of nationality ; " though, perhaps, many that 

mountains, burst at once upon their view. we now see have once been volcanic." 

" Ah, signor 1 " exclaimed Paulo, "what " I honour them for that, signor, and look 
a prospect is here 1 It reminds me of home ; at them with double satisfaction ; but onr 

k is almost as pleasant as the bay of Naples ! mountain is the only mountain in the world. 
I should never love it like that though, if it Oh ! to see it of adark night i what a blazing 

were a hundred times finer." it makes ! and what a height it will shoot to I 

The travellers stopped to admire the scene, and what a li^ht it throws over the st a ! No 

and to give their horses rest, after the labour other mountam can do so. It seems as if 

of the ascent. The evening sun, shooting the waves were all on fire. I have seen the 

athwart a clear expanse of water, between reflection as far off as Capri, trembling all 

eighteen and twenty leagues in circumference, across the gulf, and showing every vessel 

lighted up all the towns and villages, and as plain as at noon day ; ay, and every sailor 

towered castles and spiry convents, that en- on the deck. You never saw such a sight, 

riched the rising shores, brought out all the signor." 

various tints of cultivation, and coloured with " Whv, you do, indeed, seem to have for- 
beam^ purple the mountains, which on every gotten that I ever did, Paulo, and also that a 
side lormea the majestic background of the volcano can do any mischief. Butletns return, 
landscape. Vivaldi pointed out to Ellena EUena, to the scene before us. Yundcr, a 
the gigantic Velino in the north, a barrier mile or two within the shore, is the town of 
mountain between the territories of Rome Celano, whither we are going." 
and Naples. Its peaked head towered far The clearness of an Italian atmosphere 
above eveiy neighbouring summit, and its permitted him to discriminate the minute 
white precipices were opposed to the verdant though very distant features of the land- 
points of the Majella, snow-crowned, how- scape ; and on an eminence rising from the 
ever, and next in altitude, loved by the flocks, plains of a valley, opening to the west, he 
Westward, near woody hills, and rising im- pointed out the modem Alba, crowned with 
mediately from the lake, appeared Monte the ruins of its ancient castle, still visible upon 
Salviano, covered with wild sage, as the splendour of the horizon, the prison and 
its name imports, and once pompous with tomb of many a Prince, who " fallen from his 
forests of chestnut; a branch from theAp- high estate,' was sent from Imperial Rome 
penine extended to meet it. "See," said to finish here the sad reverse of his days ; 
Vivaldi, "where Monte Como stands like a to gaze from the bars of his tower upon soli- 
ruffian, huge, scared, threatening, and hor- tudes, where beauty or grandeur administered 
rid ! — and In the south, where the sullen no assuaging feelings to him, whose life had 
mountain of San Nicola shoots up, barren passed amidst the intrigues of the world and 
and rocky 1 From thence, mark how other the feverish contentions of disappointed am- 
overtopping ridges of the mighty Appenine bition ; to him, with whom reflection brought 
darken the horizon far sJong the east, and only remorse, and anticipation despair ; whom 
circle to approach the Velino in the north I " "no horizontal beam enlivened in the crim- 

"Mark too," said Ellena, *' how sweetly son evening of life's dusty day." 
the banks and undulating plains repose at "And to such a scene as this, "said Vivaldi, 

the feet of the mountains ; what an image " a Roman Emperor came, only for the pur- 

of beauty and elegance they oppose to the pose of witnessing the most barbarous exhibi- 

awftd grandeur that overlooks and ^^rds tion I to indulge the most savage delights ! 

tliem. Observe, too, how many a dehghtful Here Claudius celebrated the accomplishment 

valley, opening from the lake, spreads its rice of his arduous work, an aqueduct to carry the 

and com fields, shaded with groves of the overflowing waters of the Celano to Rome, by 

almond, fiar among the winding hills ; how a naval fight, in which hundreds of wretched 

gaily vineyards and olives alternately chequer slaves perished for his amusement I Its pure 

the acclivities, and how gracefully the lofty and polished surface was stained with human 

palms bend over the higher cliffs I " blood, and roughened by the plunging bodies 

" Av, signora 1 " exclaimed Paulo, " and of the slain, while the gilded galleys of the 

have tne goodness to observe how like are the Emperor floated gaily around, and these 

fishing boats that sail towards the hamlet beautiful shores were made to echo with ap- 

below, to those one sees upon the bay of plauding yells, worthy of the furies I " 
Naples. They are worth all the rest of the "We scarcely dare to tmst the tmth of 

prospect, except indeed this huge sheet of histonr, in some of its traits of human nature," 

water, which is almost as good as the bay, said Ellena. 

and that mountain, with its sharp head, " Signor," cried Paulo, " l\va.N^>Q^?xvKJcCvj^- 

which is almost as good as Vesuvius— if it ing that while vie aie Is^va^ \Jcv^ ^vt ^o xtt»>s2^ 

wotdd but ihrow out Gre I " at our ease tee, iViose Caxm^VVRs* xoaw-i \3Ri 

"We must despair of Rnding a mountain spying at us from some Yvo\e ox ccycxi^"t ^Coax 

la tbisoefgbbourboodsojS^^as to do that, we know tiol\iiiig o^, aa^ tx\^^ svqoo^ w^-tv^^ 



>as 



76 THE ITALIAN, 

all of a sudden, before we can help ourselves. Ellena, who endeavoured to reconcile herself 

Had we not better go on, signor? " to the necessity of remaining where she was ; 

"Our horses are, perhaps, sufficiently but Paulo, ever active and zealous, soon 

rested," replied Vivaldi, "but, if I had not brought intelligence that at a little fishing 

long since dismissed all suspicion of the e\nl town at some distance, on the bank of the 

intention of those strangers, I should not lake, was a convent of Ursalines, remaxicalile 

willingly have stopped for a moment." for their hospitality to strangers. The obscurity 

" But pray let us proceed," said Ellena. of so remote a place was another reason for 

"Ay, signora, it is best to be of the safe preferringittoCelano;and Vivaldi proposing 

side," observed Paulo. '* Yonder, below, is to remove thither, if Ellena was not too weary 

Celano ; and I hope we shall get safe housed to proceed, she readily assented, and they 

there before it is quite dark, for here we have immediately set off. 

no mountain that will light us on our way if "It happens to be a fine night," said Paulo, 
we should happen to be- benighted ! Ah ! if on leaving Celano, '' and as for that matter, 
we were but within twenty miles of Naples, our nights generally are, so, signor, we can- 
now — and it was an illumination night 1 " not well lose our way ; besides, the^ say there 

As they descended the mountain, Ellena, is but one. The town we are going to lies 

silent and dejected, abandoned herself to yonder, on the edge of the lake, about a mile 

reflection. She was too sensible of the diffi- and a half off. I think I can see a grey 

culties of her present situation, and too ap- steeple or two a little to the right of that 

prehcnsive of the influence which her determi- wood, where the water gleams so." 

nation must have on all her future life, to be " No, Paulo," replied Vivaldi, after looking 

happy, though escaped from the prison of attentively, " I perceive what you mean ; but 

San Stefano, and in the presence of Vivaldi, those are not the points of steeples, they are 

her beloved deliverer and protector. He only the tops of some tall cypresses." 

oteerved her dqection with grief, and, not ' ' Pardon me, signor, they are too tapering 

understanding all the finer scruples that dis- for trees ; that must surdy be the town, 

tressed her, interpreted her reserve into in- This road, however, will lead us right, for 

difference towards himself. But he forbore there is no other to puzzle us, as they 

to disturb her again with a mention of his say." 

doubts or fears; and he determined not to "This cool and balmy air revives me," 

urge the subject of his late entreaties, till he said Ellena, "and what a soothing shade 

should have placed her in some secure asylum, prevails over the scene. How softened, yet 

where she might feel herself at perfect liberty how distinct, is e^ry near object ; how 

to accept or to reject his proposal. By acting sweetly dubious the more removed ones ; 

with an honour so delicate, he unconsciously while the mountains beyond character them- 

adopted a certain means of increasing her selves sublimely upon the still glowing 

esteem and gratitude, and deserved them the horizon." 

more since he had to endure the apprehension "Observe, too," added Vivaldi, "how 

of losing her by the delay thus occasioned to their broken summits, tipped with the beams 

their nuptials. that have set to our lower region, exhibit 

They reached the town of Celano before the portraiture of towers and ca^es and em- 

the evening closed ; when Vivaldi was re- battled ramparts, which appear designed to 

quested by Ellena to inquire for a convent, guard them against the enemies that may 

where she might be lodged for the night, come by the clouds." 

He left her at the inn, with Paulo for her "Yes," replied Ellena, "the mountains 

guard, and proceeded on his search. The themselves displav a sublimity that seems to 

first gate he knocked upon belonged to a belong to a higher world ; their besiegers 

society of Carmelites. It appeared probable ought not to be of this earth : they can be 

that the pilgrims of that order who had only spirits of the air." 

occasioned him so much disquietude were "They can be nothing-else, signora," said 

honest brothers of this house ; but, as it was Paulo, " for nothing of this earth can reach 

also probable that if they were emissaries of them. See, lady, they have some of the 

the Abbess of San Stefano, and came to qualities of your spirits, too ; see how they 

Celano, they would take up their lodging with change their shapes and colours, as the sun- 

a community of their own class in preference beams sink. And now, how grey and dim 

to that of any other, Vivaldi thought it pru- they grow. See but how fest they vanish I " 

dent to retire from their gates without making " Everything reposes," observed Vivaldi, 

himself known. He passed on, therefore, '* Who would willingly travel in the day, when 

and soon after arrived at a convent of Domi- Italy has such nights as this ! " 

nicans, where he learned that there were only "Signor, that is the town before us," said 

two houses of nuns in Celano, and that these Paulo, "for now I can discern, plain enough, 

admitted DO other boarders than permanent the spires of convents ; and there goes a 

oj7es, light \ Ha \ Ya. \ smA xlvere is a bell, too, 

Vivaldi returned with this information to chiming from one ol \\ve s^«ca\ T>aft xMi\^5& 



THE ITALIAN. 77 

are going to mass : would we were going to consisted of one street straggling along the 

supper, signcMT 1 " margin of the lake ; and having inquir^l for 

" That chime is nearer than the place you the Ursaline convent, were directed to its 

point to, Paulo, and I doubt whether it comes gates. The porteress appeared immediately 

from the same quarter." upon the ringing of the bell, and carried a 

" Hark I signor, the air wafts the sound, message to the abbess, who, returning an in- 

and now it is gone again." vitation to Ellena, she alighted, and followed 

"Yes, I believe you are right, Paulo, and the porteress to the parlour, while Vivaldi 

that we have not far to go." remained at the gate till he should know 

The travellers descended the gradual slopes whether she approved of her new lodging. 
tO¥rards the shore ; and PaiUo some time A second invitation induced him also to 
after exclaimed, "See, signor, where another alight. He was admitted to the grate, and 
light glides along. See, it is reflected on the offered refreshment, which, however, he de- 
lake, clined staying to accept, as he had yet a 

"I hear the faint dashing of waves now," lodging to seek for the night. The abbess, 

said EUena, "and the sound of oars, too. on learning this circumstance, courteously 

But observe, Paulo, the light is not in the recommended him to a neighbouring society 

town, it is in the boat that moves yonder." of Benedictines, and desired him to mention 

" Now it retreats, and trembles in a her name to the abbot, 

lengthening line upon the dark waters," added Vivaldi then took leave of Ellena, and, 

Vivaldi. "We have been too ready to be- though it was only for a few hours, he left 

lieve what we wish, and have yet far to go." her with dejection, and with some degree of 

The shore they were approaching formed a apprehension for her .safety, which, though 
spacious bay for the lake immediately below, circumstances could not justify him in ad- 
Dark woods seemed to spread along the mitting, he could not entirely subdue. She 
|>anks and ascend among the cultivated slopes shared his dejection, but not his fears, when 
towards the mountains ; except where, here the door closed after him, and she found 
and there, cliffs bending over the water were herself once more among strangers. The 
distinguished through the twilight by the forlornness of her feelings could not t>e en- 
whiteness of their limestone precipices, tirely overcome by the attentions of the ab- 
Within the bay the t<}wn became gradually bess ; and there was a degree of curiosity and 
visible ; lights twinkled between the trees, even of scrutiny expressed in the looks of 
appearing and vanishing like the stars of a some of the sisters which seemed more than 
cloudy night ; and at length was heard the was due to a stranger. From such examina- 
melancholy song of boatmen, who were fish- tion she eagerly escaped to the apartment 
ing near the shore. allotted for her, and to the repose from which 

Other sounds soon after struck the ear. she had so long been withheld. 

" Oh, what merry notes 1" exclaimed Paulo ; Vivaldi, meanwhile, had found an hospit- 

" they make my heart dance. See ! signora, able reception with the Benedictines, whose 

there is a group footing it away so gaily on sequestered situation made the visit of a 

the bank of the lake yonder, by those trees stranger a pleasurable novelty to them. In 

where the water glimmers 1 Oh, what a merry the eagerness of conversation, and, yielding 

set 1 Would I were among them ; that is, I to the satisfjaction which the mind receives from 

mean, if vou, maestro, and the signora were exercising ideas that have long slept in dusky 

not here. indolence, and to the pleasure of admitting 

• • Well corrected, Paulo. " new ones, the abbot and a few of the brothers 

" It is a festival, I fancy," observed Vivaldi, sat with Vivaldi to a late hour. When, at 

"These peasants of the lake can make the length, the traveller was suffered to retire, 

moments fly as gaily as the voluptuaries of other subjects than those which had interested 

Uie city, it seems." his host engaged his thoughts ; and he re- 

" Oh! what merry music!" repeated Paulo, volved the means of preventing the misery 

"Ah ! how often I have footed it as joyously that threatened him in a serious separation 

on the beach at Naples, after sunset of a fine from Ellena. Now that she was received 

night like this, with such a pleasant fresh into a respectable asylum, every motive for 

breeze to cool one. Ah 1 there are none like silence upon this topic was done away. He 

the fishermen of Naples for a dance by determined, therefore, that on the following 

moonlight ; how lightly do they trip it ! Oh ! morning he would urge all his reasons and 

if I was but there now ! That is, I mean, if entreaties for an immediate marriage ; and 

you, maestro, and the signora were there too. among the brothers of the Benedictine, he 

Oh ! what merry notes 1 " had little doubt of prevailing with one to 

"We thank you, good Signor Paulo," said solemnize the nuptials, which he believed 

Vivaldi, "and I trust we shall all be there would place his happiness and EUavkaJ^^^^^Rfc 

soon, when you shall trip it away with as beyond tbe mftuenc^ ol xoaXx^'axX ^^-s^-ar 

joyous a heart as the best of tbem. " biUties, 

The tmrdlers now entered the town, which — ^ 



78 THE ITALIAN), 

ryriTD V TV Tc^TiA ID such a state as Was hers. The delay 

CHAPTER XIV. Qf ^^ opportunity for iinburthening her heart 

WHILE Vivaldi and Ellena were on the to Schedoni was hardly to be endured; 
way from San Stefano, the Marchese another and another messenger were de- 
di Vivaldi was suffering the utmost vexation spalched to her confessor, 
respecting his son ; and the Marchesa felt not "My mistress has committed some great 
le5s npprehcnsinn ihat the abode of Ellena sin, truly," said the servant, who had Deen 
miglit be discovered; yet this fear did not twice to the convent within the last half-hour, 
wlihholdher from mingling in all the gaieties "It must lie heavy on her conscience, in 
i)f Naples. Her assemblies were, as usual, good truth, since she cannot support it for 
among the most brilliant of that voluptuous one half-hour. Well I the rich have this 
city, and she patronised, as jealously as for- comfort, however, that, let them be never so 
mcrly, the strains of her favourite composer, guilty, they can buy themselves innocent 
lUit, notwithstanding this perpetual dissipa- again, in the twinkling of a ducat. Now a 
tion, her thoughts frerjuently withdrew them- poor man might be a month before he re- 
selves from the scene, and dwelt on gloomy covered his innocence, and that, too, not till 
forebodings of disappointed pride. after many a bout of hard flogging." 

A circumstance which rendered her par- In the evening Schedoni came, out it was 
ticularly susceptible to such disappointment only to confirm her worst fear. He, too, had 
at this time was, that overtures of alliance heard of the escape of Ellena, as well as that 
had l^ecn 1:^tcly made to the Marchese by she was on the laice of Celano, and wasmar- 
thc father of a lady who was held suitable, in ried to Vivaldi. How he had obtained this 
every consideration, to liecome his dangfater; information he did not choose to disclose; but 
and whose wealth rendered the union par- he mentioned so many minute circumstances 
ticularly desinible, at a time when the ex- in confirmation of its truth, and appeared to 
pcnses of such an establishment as was be so perfectly convinced of the feicts he re- 
necessary to the vanity of the Marchesa lated, that the Marchesa believed them as 
considerably exceeded his income, large as it implicitly as himself ; and her passion and 
was. despair transgressed all bounds of decorum. 

The Marchesa's temper had been thus Schedoni observed, with dark and silent 
irritiitcd by the contemplation of her son's pleasure, the turbulent excess of her feelings, 
conduct in an affair which so materially and perceived that the moment was now ar- 
affccted the fortune, and, as she believed, the rived when he might command them to his 
honour of his family ; when a courier from purpose, so as to render his assistance in- 
thc Abbess of San Stefano brought intelli- dispensable to her repose, and, probably, so 
fjcnce of the flight of Ellena with Vivaldi, as to accomplish the revenge he had long 
She was in a disposition which heightened meditated against Vivaldi, without hazarding 
disappointment into fury ; and she forfeited, the lavour of the Marchesa. So far was he 
by the transports to which she yielded, the from attempting to soothe her sufferings, that 
degree of pity that otherwise was due fo a he contrived to irritate her resentment and 
mother who believed her only son to have exasperate her pride ; effecting this, at the 
sacrificed his family and himself to an un- same time, with such consummate art that he 
worthy passion. She understood that he was appeared only (o be palliating the conduct of 
now married, and irrecoverably lost. Scarcely Vivaldi and endeavoiffing to console his dis- 
able to endure the agony of this conviction, tracted mother. 

she sent for her ancient adviser, Schedoni, " This is a rash step, certainly," said the 
that she might, at least, have the relief of confessor; "but he is young, very young, and 
expressing her motions, and of examining therefore does not foresee the consequences 
whether there remained a possibility of dis- to which it leads. He does not perceive how 
solving these long dreaded nuptials. The seriously it will affect the dignity of his house; 
frenzy of passion, however, did not so far how much it will depreciate his consequence 
overcome her circumspection as to compel with the Court, with the nobles of his own 
hor to acquaint the Marchese with the con- rank, and even with the plebeians with whom 
tents of the abbess's letter before she had he has condescended to connect himself. In- 
consulted with her confessor. She knew that toxicated with the passions of youth, he does 
the principles of her husband were too just, not weigh the value of those blessings which 
upon the grand points of morality, to suffer wisdom and the experience of maturer age 
him to adopt the measures she might judge know how to estimate. He neglects them 
necessary ; and .she avoided informing him only because he does not perceive their in- 
of the marriage of his son, until the means of fluence in society, and that lightly to resign 
counteracting it should have been suggested them is to degrade himself in the view of 
and accomplished, however desperate such almost every mind. Unhappy young man ! 
/»mns might be. he is to be pitied fuUy as much as blamed." 
Schedom was not to be found. Trifling " Your excuses, lemciid ««lb«," said tbo 
c/rcumstances wcreve the irritation of a tortured MatcYkeaa,"vwi* iCb» «wQsnm ^A 



THE ITALIAN. 79 

your lieart ; fxit they illustrate, also, the de- remaining silent, he added, " I have often 

genenu^ of his m^, and detail the full marvelled that our lawgivers should have 

extent of the effects which he has brought failed to perceive the justness, nay the neces- 

upon his family. It affords me no consola- sity, of such punishment 1 " 

tion to know that this degradation proceeds "It is astonishing," said the Marchesa, 

from his head rather than his heart ; it is thoughtfully, that a regard for their own 

sufficient that he has incurred it, and that no honour did not suggest it." 

possibili^ remains of throwing off the mis- *' Justice does not the less exist, because 

fortune/ her laws are neglected," observed Schedoni. 

" Perhaps that is affirming too much," ob- "A sense of what she commands lives in 

served SchedonL every breast : and when we fail to obey that 

'• How, father 1 " said the Marchesa. sense, it is to weakness, not to virtue, that we 

" Perhaps a possibility does remain," he yield." 

added. "Certainly," replied the Marchesa, •' that 

'* Point it oat to me, good father I I do truth never yet was doubted." 

not perceive it." " Pardon me, I am not so certain as to 

"Nay, my lady," replied the subtle Sche- that," said the confessor. "When justice 

doni, correcting himself, " I am by no means happens to oppose prejudice, we are apt to 

assured that such possit>ility does exist. My believe it virtuous to disobey her. For in- 

solicitude for your tranqiUllity, and for the stance, though the law of justice demands the 

honour of your house, makes me so un- death of this girl, yet because the law of the 

willii^f to relinquish hope, that, perhaps, I land fort)ears to enforce it, you, my daughter, 

only imi^ne a possibility in your favour. Let even you ! though possessed of a man's 

me consider. ^Alas I tne misfortune, severe spirit, and his clear perceptions, would think 

as it is, must be endured ; there remain no that virtue bade her live, when it was only 

means of escaping firom it." fear 1 " 

" It was cruel cf you, father, to suggest a " Hah I " exclaimed the Marchesa, in alow 

hope which you could not justify," observed voice, "What is it that you mean? You 

the Marchesa. shall find I have a man's courage also." 

** You must accuse my extreme solicitude, " I speak without disguise," repUed Sche- 

then," replied the confessor. " But how is doni ; "mv meaning requires none." 

it possible for me to see a family of your The Marchesa mused, and remained 

ancient estimation brought into such circum- silent. 

stances ; its honours blighted by the folly of a "I have done my duty, " resumed Schedoni, 

thoughtless boy, without feeling sorrow and at length. "I have pointed out the only 

indignation, and looking round for even some way that remains for you to escape dishonour. 

desperate means of delivering it from dis- If my zeal is displeasing but I have 

grace." He paused. done." 

** Disgrace 1 " exclaimed the Marchesa, "No, good father, no, " said the Marchesa, 
•'father, you— you — dismce !— The word is "you mistake the cause of my emotion. 
a strong one, but it is, alas ! Justly ap- New ideas, new prospects, open I— they con- 
plied. And shall we submit to this ? — Is it fuse, they distract me ! My mind has not yet 
possible we can submit to it ? " attained sufficient strength to encounter them; 

'•There is no remedy," said Schedoni, some woman's weakness, too, still lingers at 

coldly. my heart." 

** Good God !" said the Marchesa, " that "Pardon my inconsiderate zeal," said 

there should be no law to prevent, or, at least. Schedoni, with affected humility, I have been 

to punish such criminal marriages ! " to blame. If yours is a weakness, it is. at 

*'It is much to be lamented," replied least, an amiable one, and, perhaps, deserves 

Schedoni. to ht encouraged rather than conquered." 

'* The woman who obtrudes herself upon • ' How, father ! If it deserves encoiu'age- 

a family, to dishonour it," continued the ment it is not a weakness but a virtue." 

Marchesa. deservesa punishment nearly equal "Beit so," said Schedoni, coldly, "the 

to that of a state criminal, since she injures interest I have felt on this subject has per- 

those who best support the state. She ought haps misled my judgment, and has rendered 

to suffer ." me unjust. Think no more of it, or if you 

" Not nearly, but quite equal," interrupted do, let it be only to pardon the zeal I have 

the confessor, " she deserves death 1 " testified." 

He paused, and there was a moment of "It does not deserve pardon, but thanks," 

profound silence, till he added — "for death replied the Marchesa ; " not i hanks only, but 

only can obviate the degradation she has reward. Good father, I hope it will sovoa. 

occasioned ; her death alone can restore the time be in my pONVOi lo ij^ion^ ^^ ^vdlq.<^\\.^ 

original splendour of the line she would have of my words. 

iQlliad. " The confessor Wii«^ ^U Yk«^« 

H9 ptmod agtdn, but fb^ Marchesa stiil ** I trust Uiat ^"^ «Rri\!i:«& ^ckXxXuv^ T«^ 



8o 



THE ITALIAN. 



dered me shall be gratefully repaid — re- 
warded, I dare not hope, for what benefit 
could possibly reward a service so vast as it 
may, perhaps, be in your power to confer 
upon my family! What recompense could 
be balanced against the benefit of having 
rescued the honour of an ancient house ! " 

"Your goodness is beyond my thanks, or 
my desert," said Schedoni, and he was again 
silent. 

The Marchesa wished him to lead her back 
to the point from which she herself had de- 
viated, and he seemed determined that she 
should lead him thither. She mused and 
hesitated. Her mind was not yet familiar 
with atrocious guilt, and the crime which 
Schedoni had suggested somewhat alarmed 
her. She feared to think, and still more to 
name it ; yet, so acutely susceptible was her 
pride, so stem her indignation, and so pro- 
found her desire of vengeance, that her mind 
was tossed as on a tempestuous ocean, and 
these terrible feelings threatened to overwhelm 
the residue of humanity in her heart. Sche- 
doni observed all its progressive movements, 
and, like a gaunt tiger, lurked in silence, 
ready to spring forward at the moment of 
opportunity. 

" It is your advice, then, father," resumed 
the Marchesa, after a long pause — " it is your 

opinion that this Ellena " She hesitated, 

desirous that Schedoni should anticipate her 
meaning ; but he chose to spare his own deli- 
cacy rather than that of the Marchesa. 

"You think, then, that this insidious girl 

deserves " She paused again ; but the 

confessor, still silent, seemed to wait with 
submission for what the Marchesa should 
deliver. 

"I repeat, father, that it is your opinion 



fi 



but you know how highly I estimate your ad« 
vice, and will not refuse when I shall at some 
future time request it." 

" I cannot refuse to accept an honour, *• 
replied the confessor, with an air of meek- 
ness ; "but the subject you allude to is 
delicate " 

"And therefore I must value and require 
your opinion upon it," rejoined the Mar- 
chesa. 

" I would wish you to value your own," 
replied Schedoni ; "you cannot have a better 
director." 

" You flatter, father." 

" I only reply, my daughter. 

" On the evening of to-morrow," said the 
Marchesa, gravely, " I shall be at vespers in 
the church of San Nicola ; if you should 
happen to be there, you will probably see me, 
when the service is over and the congregation 
is departed, in the north cloister. We can 
there converse on the subject nearest my 
heart, and without observation. Farewell i ' 

*' Peace be with you, daughter ! and wisdom 
counsel your thoughts!" said Schedoni, "I 
will not fail to visit San Nicola." 

He folded his hands upon his breast, bowed 
his head, and left the apartment, with the 
silent footsteps that indicates wariness and 
conscious duplicity. 

The Marchesa remained in her closet, 
shaken by ever-varying passions, and ever- 
fluctuating opinions ; meditating miseiy for 
others, and inflicting it only upon herself. 



this girl deserves severe punishment 



II 



Is it 



" Undoubtedly," replied Schedoni. 
not also your own ? " 

'•That not any punishment can be too 
severe?" continued the Marchesa. "That 

justice, equally with necessity, demands 

her life? Is not this your opinion, too ? " 

"Ohl pardon me," said Schedoni. "I 
may have en ed ; that only was my opinion ; 
and when 1 formed it I was probably too 
much under the influence of zeal to be just. 
When the he.irt is warm, how is it possible 
that the judgment can be cool ?" 

" It is not, then, your opinion, holy father," 
said the Marchesa, with displeasure. 

" I do not absolutely say that," replied the 
confessor. " But I leave it to your better 
judgment to decide upon its justness." 

As he said this he rose to depart. The 
Marchesa was agitated and perplexed, and 
requested he would stay ; but he excused 
himself by alleging that it was the hour when 
he must attend a particular mass. 

" Well, then, holy father, I will occupy no 
'vorcof^Qur valuabh moments at present ; 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE Marchesa repaired, according to her 
appointment, to the church of San Ni- 
cola; and, ordering her servants to remain with 
the carriage at a side door, entered the choir, 
attended only by her woman. 

When vespers had concluded, she lingered 
till nearly every person had quitted the choir, 
and then walked through the solitary aisles to 
the north cloister. Her heart was as heavy 
as her step ; for when is it that peace and 
evil passions dwell together? as she slowly 
paced the cloister, she perceived a monk 
passing between the pillars, who, as he ap- 
proached, lifted his cowl, and she knew him 
to be Schedoni. 

He instantly observed the agitation of her 
spirits, and that her purpose was not yet 
determined according to his hope. But, 
though his mind became clouded, his coun- 
tenance remained imaltered ; it was grave and 
thoughtful. The sternness of his vidture-like 
eye was, however, somewhat softened, and its 
lids were contracted by subtlety. 

The Marchesa bade her woman walk apart 
while she conferred with her confessor. 

"This unhappy boy," said she, when the 
attendant was al ^ome distatice« "How much 
sufferlos doe& Y^ 1q\V^ \xkfiicX>x9Qiu\fl^^axi)i^^ 



THE ITALIAN. 



8c 



My good &ther, I have need of all your ad- 
▼ice and consolation. My mind is perpetually 
haunted by a sense of my misfortune ; it has 
no respite ; awake or in my dream, this un- 
grateful son alike pursues me ! The only 
relief my heart receives is when conversing 
with yoo — ^my only counsellor, my only dis- 
interested friend." 

The confessor bowed. " The Marchese is, 
no dOubt, equally afflicted with yourself," said 
he ; *' but he is, notwithstanding, much more 
competent to advise you on this delicate sub- 
ject than I am." 

"The Marchese has prejudices, father, as 
you well know ; he is a sensible man, but he 
is sometimes mistaken, and he is incorrigible 
in error. He has the faults of a mind that is 
merely well disposed ; he is destitute of the 
discernment and the energy which would 
make it great. If it is necessary to adopt a 
conduct that departs in the smallest degree 
from those common rules of morality which 
he has cherished, without examining them, 
from his infancy, he is shocked and shrinks 
from action. He cannot discriminate the 
circumstances that render the same action 
virtuous or vicious. How then, father, are 
we to suppose he would approve of the bold 
inflictions we meditate ? " 

"Most true!" said the artful Schedoni, 
with an air of admiration. 

"We, therefore, must not consult him," 
continued the Marchesa, " lest he should now, 
as formerly, advance and maintain objections 
to which we cannot yieM. What passes in 
conversation with you, father, is sacred, it 
goes no further." 

" Sacred as a confession ! " said Schedoni, 
crossing himself. 

" I know not," — resumed the Marchesa, 
and hesitated ; " I know not," — she repeated 
in a yet lower voice, " how this girl may be 
disposed of; and thi^ it is which distracts 
my mind." 

" I marvel much at that," said Schedoni. 
** With opinions so singularly just, with a 
mind so accurate, yet so bold as you have 
displayed, is it possible that you can hesitate 
as to what is to be done ! You, my daughter, 
will not prove yourself one of those ineffectual 
declaimers, who can think vigorously, but 
cannot act so ? One way, only, remains for 
you to pursue, in the present instance ; it is 
the same which your superior sagacity pointed 
out, and taught me to approve. Is it neces-^ 
sary for me to persuade her^ by whom I am 
convinciH ! There is only one way." 

"And on that I have been long medi- 
tating, " replied the Marchesa, " and, shall I 
own my weakness? I cannot yet decide.'* 

" My daughter t can it be possible that 
you should want courage to soar above vulgar 
prejudice, in action, though not in opinion 1 " 
said Schedoni, ^ffho, perceiving that his assist- 
^9ca mu aeoMSfuyr to ^ her ifiuctuatiog 



mind, gradually began to steal forth from the 
prudent reserve in which he had taken 
shelter. 

" If this person was condemned by the 
law," he continued, you would pronounce her 
sentence to be just ; yet you oare not, I am 
humbled while I repeat it, you dare not dis- 
pense justice yourself ! " 

The Marehesa, after some hesitation, said, 
" I have not the shield of the law to protect 
me, father : and the boldest virtue may pause 
when it reaches the utmost verge of safety." 

" Never ! " replied the confessor, warmly ; 
"virtue never trembles ; it is her glory and 
sublimest attribute to be superior to dimger,' 
to despise it. The best principle is not virtue 
till it reaches this elevation." 

A philosopher might, perhaps, have been 
surprised to hear two persons seriously defin- 
ing the limits of virtue, at the very moment 
in which they meditated the most atrocious 
crime ; a man of the world would have con- 
sidered it to be mere hypocrisy : a supposi- 
tion which might have disclosed his general 
knowledge of manners, but would certainly 
have betrayed his ignorance of the human 
heart. 

The Marchesa was for some time silent and 
thoughtful, and then repeated deliberately, 
" I have not the shield oi the law to protect 
me. 

" But you have the shield of the Church," 
replied Schedoni ; "you should not only 
have protection, but absolution." 

"Absolution !— Does virtue — justice, re- 
quire absolution, father?" 

• ' When I mentioned absolution for the 
action which you perceive to be so just and 
necessary," replied Schedoni, I accommodated 
my speech to vulgar prejudice, and to vulgar 
weakness. And, forgive me, that since you, 
my daughter, descended from the loftiness 
of your spirit to regret the shield of the law, 
I endeavoured to console you, by offering a 
shield to conscience. But enough of this ; 
let us return to argument. This girl is put 
out of the way of committing more mischief, 
of injuring the peace and dignity of a dis- 
tinguished family ; she is sent to an eternal 
sleep before her time. Where is the crime, 
where is the evil of this ? On the contrary, 
you perceive, and you have convinced me, 
that it is only strict justice, only self-defence." 

The Marchesa was attentive, and the con- 
fessor added, " She is not immortal ; and the 
few years more that might have been allotted 
her she deverves to forfeit, since she would 
have employed them in cankering the honour 
of an illustrioils house." 

"Speak low, father," said the Marchesa, 
though he spoke almost in a whisper ; " the 
cloister appears solitary, yet some person rcia?{ 
lurk behind those p\!A^x^, KiSiJ^vsfc xc^^ Vow 
this business may \» T&accviaL^<&\ \\ ^cciK^^'tasi, 
of th^ paTUc\ji!^«A m«Mk&«'' 



8a 



THB ITAUAN. 



"There is some hazard in the accomplish- 
ment of it, I grant," rejoined Schedoni ; " I 
know not in whom you may confide.— The 
men who make a trade of blood " 

" Hush ! " said the Marchesa, looking 
round through the twilight — "a step ! " 

" It is the Friar's, yonder, who crosses to 
the choir," observed Schedoni. 

They were watchful for a few moments, 
and then he resumed the subject " Mer- 
cenaries ought not be trusted " 

"Yet who but mercenaries" — interrupted 
the Marchesa, and instantly checked herself. 
But the question thus implied, did not escape 
the confessor. 

"Pardon my astonishment," said he, "at 
the inconsistency, or, what shall I venture to 
call it ? of your opinions ! After the acuteness 
you have displayed on some points, is it possi- 
ble you can doubt that principle may both 
prompt and perform the deed ? Why should 
wc hesitate to do what we judge to be right ? " 

"Ah 1 reverend father," observed the Mar- 
chesa, with emotion, " but where shall we 
find another like yourself — another who not 
only can perceive with justness, but will act 
with energy?" 

Schedoni was silent. 

• ' Such a friend is above all estimation ; but 
where shall we seek him ? " 

" Daughter ! " said the monk, emphatically, 
"ray zead for your family is also above all 
calculation." 

" Good father," replied the Marchesa, com- 
prehending his full meaning, " I know not 
how to thank you." 

"Silence is sometimes eloquence," said 
Schedoni, significantly. 

The Marchesa mused ; for her conscience 
also was eloquent. She tried to overcome its 
voice, but it would be heard ; and sometimes 
such starts of horrible conviction came over 
her mind that she felt as one who, awaking 
from a dream, opens his eyes only to measure 
the depth of the precipice on which he totters. 
In such moments she was astonished that 
she had paused for an instant upon a sub- 
ject so terrible £»s that of murder. The 
sophistry of the confessor, together with 
the inconsistencies which he had betrayed, 
and which had not escaped the notice of the 
Marchesa, even at the time they were uttered, 
though she had been unconscious of her own, 
then became more strongly apparent, and 
she almost determined to suffer the poor 
EUena to live. But returning passion, Uke a 
wave that has recoiled from the shore, after- 
wards came with re-collected energy, and swept 
from her feeble mind the barriers which 
reason and conscience had began to rear. 

"The confidence with which you have 
thought proper to honour me," resumed 

^cnedoni, " this affair, so momentous " 

r^h^.^^^' fWs affair/' interrupted the Mar- 
poesa, /a a hurried maimer, — '• but when, and 



where, good father ? Beinfif once convinced, 
I am anxious to have it settled." 

"That must be as occasion offers," replied 
the monk, thoughtfully.—" On the shore of 
the Adriatic, in the province of Apidia, not 
far from Manfredonia, is a house that might 
suit the purpose. It is a lone dvrdling on the 
beach, and concealed from tiavdlers, among 
the forests which spread for many mil^ 
along the coast." 

" And the people? " said the Mardiesa. 

"Aye, daughter, or why travel so &r as 
Apulia ? It is inhabited by one poor man, 
who sustains a miserable existence by fishing. 
I know him, and could unfold the reason of 
his soUtaiy hfe ; — but no matter, it is sufficient 
that / know him. 

" And would trust him, father ? " 

"Aye, lady, with the life of this girl- 
though scarcely with my own." 

** How I If he is such a villain he may not 
be trusted 1 think further. Bat now, you ob- 
jected to a mercenary, yet this man is one ! " 

" Daughter, he may be trusted ; when it is 
in such a case, he is safe and sure. I have 
reason to know him." 

" Name your reasons, fether." 

The confessor was silent, and his counten- 
ance assumed a very peculiar character ; it 
was more terrible than usual, and overspread 
with a dark cadaverous hue of mingled anger 
and guilt. The Marchesa started involimtarily 
as, passing by a window, the evening gleam 
that fell there discovered it : and for the first 
time she wished that she bad not committed 
herself so wholly to his power. But the die 
was now cast ; it was too late to be prudent ; 
and she again demanded his reasons. 

"No matter," said Schedoni, in a stiffed 
voice, " she dies I" 

" By his hands ? " asked the Marchesa, with 
strong emotion. ' ' Think, once more, father. " 

They were both again silent and thought- 
ful. The Marchesa at length said, " Father, 
I rely upon your integrity and prudence ; " 
and she laid a very flattering emphasis upon 
the word integrity. "But I conjure you to 
let this business be finished quickly, suspense 
is to me the purgatory of this world, and not 
to trust the accomplishment of it to a second 
person." After a momentary pause she 
added, " I would not wilUngly owe so vast a 
debt of obligation to any other than yourseb^" 

' ' Your request, daughter, that I would not 
confide this business to a second person, " said 
Schedoni, with displeasure, ''canno^ be ac- 
corded to. Can you suppose that I, my- 
self " 

"Can I doubt that principle may both 
prompt and perform the deed?" interrupted 
the Marchesa with quickness, and anticipating 
his meaning, while she retorted upon him his 
former words, "Why should we hesitate to 
do what we judffe to be right ? " 



THE tTAUAN, 83 

dbpleafttlrt^ which the Ktarchesa immediately Schedoni, without replying to the question, 

understanding — ** There, on the shore, when darluiess covers 

" ConsideTi good father," she added signi- it ; there, plunged amidst the waves, no stain 

ficantly, "how painful it must be to me to shall hint of " 

owe so infinite an obligation to a stranger, or " Hark 1 " interrupted the Marchesa, start- 
to any other than so highly valued a friend as ing ; " that note again 1 " 
yourself." The organ sounded faintly from the choir, 

Schedoni, while he detected her meaning, and paused, as before. In the next moment, 

and persuaded himself that he despised the a slow chanting of voices was heard, mingling 

flattery with which she so thinly veiled it, un- with the rising peal, in a strain particularly 

consciously suffered his self-love to be soothed melancholy and solemn, 

by the compliment. He bowed his head in "Who is dead?" said the Marchesa, 

signal of consent to her wish. changing countenance : " it is a requiem ! " 

"Avoid violence, if that be possible," she " i'eace be with the departed 1 " exclaimed 

added, immediately comprehending him, Schedoni, and crossed himself ; "pcajercst 

*' but let her die quickly I The punishmeet with his soul ! " 

is due to the crime." " Hark to that chant I ' said the Mar- 

The Marchesa happened, as she said this, chesa, in a faltering voice; "it is a firbt 

to cast her eyes upon the inscription over a requiem ; the soul has but just quitted the 

confessional, where appeared in black letters body I " 

these awful words, *' God hears thte!" It They listened in silence. The Marchesa 

appeared an avrful warning. Her counten- was much affected ; her complexion varied at 

ance changed ; it had struck upon her heart, every instant ; her br^thinjj^ were short and 

Schedoni was too much engaged by his own interrupted, and she even shed a few tears, 

thoughts to observe or understand her silence, but they were those of despair rather than 

She soon recovered herself, and, considering of sorrow. "That body is now cold," 5aid 

that this was a common inscription for con- she to herself, "which but an hour ago was 

fcssionals, disregarded what she had at first warm and animated 1 Those fine senses 

considered as a peculiar admonition ; yet are closed in death 1 And to this condition 

some moments elapsed, before she had cour- would I reduce a being like myself I Oh, 

age to renew the subject. wretched, wretched mother ! to what has the 

"You were speaking of a place, father, re- folly of a son reduced thee I " 

sumed the Marchesa; " you mentioned a " She turned from the confessor, and walked 

"Aye," muttered the confessor, still alone in the cloister. Her agitation increased; 

musing ; "in a chamlxjr of that house she wept without restraint, for her veil and 

there is " the evening gloom concealed her, and 

"What noise is that?" said the Marchesa, her sighs were lost amidst the music of the 

interrupting him. They listened. A few low choir. 

and querulous notes of the organ sounded at Schedoni was scarcely less disturbed, but 

a distance, and stopped again. his were emotions of apprehension and con- 

" Wliat mournful music is that ?" inquired tempt. "Behold, what is woman !" said 

the Marchesa in a tremulous voice ; "it was he. "The slave of her passions, the dupe 

touched by a fearful hand I Vespers were of her senses 1 When pride and revenge 

over long ago i " speak in her breast, she defies obstacles and 

" Daughter," observed Schedoni, somewhat laughs at crimes I Assail but her senses ; let 

sternly, " you said you had a man's courage, music, for instance, touch some feeble chord 

Alas I you have a woman's heart." of her heart, and echo to her fancy and lo ! 

"Excuse me, father ; I know not why I all her perceptions change : she shrinks from 

feel this agitation, but I will command it. the act she had but an instant before believed 

That chamber " meritorious, yields to some new emotion, and 

"In that chamber," resumed the con- sinks— the victim of a sound I Oh, weak and 

fessor, "is a secret door, constructed long contemptible being ! " 

ago " The Marchesa, at least, seemed to justify 

' "And for what purpose constructed?" said his observations. The desperate passions 

the impatient Marchesa. which had resisted every remonstrance of 

*' Pardon me, daughter ; 'tis sufficient that reason and humanity were vanquished only 

it is there ; we will make a good use of it. by other passions ; and, her senses touched 

Through that door— in the night— when she by the mournful melody of music, and her 

sleeps — " superstitious tears awakened by the occurrence 

" I comprehend you," said the Marchesa, of a requiem for the dead at the very moment 

" I comprehend you. But why— you have when she was planning murder, she yielded, 

your reasons, no doubt— but why thenecessity for a while, to the uuil^d vaSw^wi,^ c»\ yjo^ 

of a secret door in a house which you «ay is and terror. Hw ^^taXXow ^\^ tvsa ^viiasAR \ 

10 lonajr—iahabited by only one person ? but she restvumed \,o \h« ooiiles&ot . 

"A pusBge leads to the sea, '* oontlnaed " We nVli cocKverae ou^DKa\jwsa«a»^'«^*»^ 



84 THE ITAUAN. 

future time," said she ; "at present my spirits would have bestowed, long since, the vows 
are disordered. Grood night, father. Remem- now solicited. Again he entreated her, by 
ber me in your orisons." every sacred and tender recollection, to con- 

" Peace be with you, lady ! " said the con- elude the fearful uncertainty of their fate, 
fessor, bowing gravely, " You shall not be and to bestow upon him the right to protect 
forgotten. Be resolute, and yourself." her before they ventured forth from this tena- 

The Marchesa beckoned her woman to porary asylum, 
approach, when, drawing her veil closer, and Ellena immediately admitted the sacredness 
leaning upon the attendant's arm, she left of the promise which she had formerly given, 
the cloister. Schedoni remained for a moment and assured Vivaldi that she considered her- 
on the spot, looking after her, till her figure self as indissolubly bound by that promise as 
was lost in the gloom of the long perspective ; if it had been given at the altar ; but she 
he then, with thoughtful steps, quitted the objected to a confirmation of it till his 
cloister by another door. He was disappointed, family should seem willing to acknowledge 
but he did not despair. her for their daughter ; when, forgetting the 

— - injuries she had received from them, she 

would no longer refuse their alliance. Ellena 
CHAPTER XVI. added that Vivaldi ought to be more jealous of 

the dignity of the woman whom he honoured 

WHILE the Marchesa and the monk were with his esteem than to permit her making a 
thus meditating conspiracies against greater concession. 
Ellena, she was still in the Ursaline convent Vi^naldi felt the full force of this appeal ; he 
on the lake of Celano. In this obscure recollected, with anguish, circumstances of 
sanctuary, indisposition, the consequence of which she was happily ignorant, but which 
the long and severe anxiety she had suffered, served to strengthen with him the justness of 
compelled her to remain. A fever was on her reproof. And as the aspersions which 
her spirits, and a universal lassitude pre- the Marchesa had thrown upon her name 
vsuled over her frame, which became the more crowded to his memory, pride and indigna- 
effectual from her very solicitude to conquer tion swelled his heart, and so far overcame 
it. Every approaching day she hoped she all apprehensions of hazard that he formed 
should be able to pursue her journey home- a momentary resolution to abandon every 
ward, yet every day found her as incapable othcnr consideration to that of asserting the 
of travelling as the last ; and the second week respect which was due to Ellena, and to for- 
was already gone before the fine air of Celano, bear claiming her for his wife till his family 
and the tranquillity of her asylum, began to should make acknowledgment of their error, 
revive her. Vivaldi, who was her daily visitor and willingly admit her in the rank of their 
at the grate of the convent — and who, watch- child. But tiiis resolution was as transient as 
ing over her with intense solicitude, had plausible ; other considerations, and former 
hitherto forbore to renew a subject which, fears, pressed upon him. He perceived the 
by agitating her spirits, might affect her strong improbability that they would ever 
health— now that her health strengthened, make a voluntary sacrifice of their pride to 
ventured gradually to mention his fears lest his love ; or yield mistsJces, nurtured by pre- 
the place of her retreat should be discovered, judice and by willing indtUgence, to truth and 
and lest he yet might irrecoverably lose her, a sense of justice. In ttie meantime, the 
unless she would approve of their speedy plans which would be formed for separating 
marriage. At every visit he now urged the him from Ellena might succeed, and he 
subject, represented the dangers that sur- should lose her for ever. Above all, it 
rounded them, and repeated his arguments appeared that the best, Ae only, method 
and entreaties ; for now, when he believed which remained for confiiting Uie daring as- 
that time was pressing forward fatal evils, he persions that had affected her name was Iqr 
could no longer attend to the delicate scruples proving the high respect he himself felt for 
that bade him be sparing in entreaty. Ellena, her, and presenting her to the world in 
had she obeyed the dictates of her heart, the sacred character of his wife. These con- 
would have rewarded his attachment and his siderations quickly determined him to per- 
services by a frank approbation of his pro- severe in his suit ; but it was impossible to 
posal ; but the objections which reason ex- urge them to Ellena, since the facts they 
hibited against such a concession she could must unfold would not only shock her deli- 
neither overcome or disregard. cacy and afflict her heart but would furnish 

Vivaldi, after he had again represented their the proper pride she cherished with new argu- 
present dangers, and claimed the promise of ments against approaching a £unily who had 
her hand, received in the presence of her de- thus grossly insulted her. 
ceased relative, Signora Bianchi, gently While these considerations occupied him, 
v^ured to remind her that an event as the emotion they occasioned did not escape 
sudden as lamentable had hrst deferred their EUena's obseTvaWoii \ \t. uwieasedas he re- 
nuptjaJs, and tliat if Bianchi had lived, Ellena fleeted on tbe ItnpossabV&X:^ 61 xw^^vaiit^OMOTL Vi 



The ITALIAN. 85 

her, tod on the hopelessness of prevailing impatience till the dock struck the signal for 

with her unless he CQ>uld produce new argu- his entrance. 

ments in his favour. His unaffected distress Ellena was already in the parlour ; she was 

awakened all her tenderness; she asked her- alone, and rose in disorder on his approach, 

self whether she ought any longer to assert His steps faltered, his voice was lost, and his 

her own rights, when, by doing so, she sacri- eyes only, which he fixed with earnestness on 

ficed the peace of him who had incurred so hers, had power to inquire her resolution, 

much danger for her sake, who had rescued She observed the paleness of his countenance 

her from sever e oppression, and had so long and his emotion with a mixture of concern 

andso well proved the strength of his afifec- and approbation. At that moment he per- 

tion. ceived her smile and hold out her hand to 

As she applied these quesdons, she appeared him; and fear, care, and doubt vanished at 

to herself an unjust and selfish being, un- once from his mind. He was incapable of 

willing to make any sacrifice for the tran- thanking her, but sighed deeply as he pressed 

quillity of him who had given her liberty even her hand, and, overcome with joy, supported 

at the risk of his life. Her very virtues, now himself against the grate that separated them, 
that they were carried to excess, seemed to "You are, then, indeed my own !" said 

her to border upon vices ; her sense of dignity Vivaldi, at length recovering his voice. " We 

appeared to be narrow pride ; her delicacy, shall be no more parted— you are mine for 

wirakness ; her moderated affection, cold in- ever 1 But your countenance changes ! Ob, 

gratitude ; and her circumspection, little heaven 1 stuely I have not mistaken I Speak 1 

less than prudence degenerated into mean- I conjture you, Ellena ; relieve me from these 

ness. terrible doubts 1" 

Vivaldi, as apt in admitting hope as fear, "I am yours, Vivaldi," replied Ellena, 

immediately pcatrdved her resolution begin- faintly ; "oppression can part us no more." 
ning to yield, and he uiged again every aigu- She wept, and drew her veil over her eyes, 
ment which was likely to prevail over it. But " What mean those tears?" said Vivaldi, 

the subject was too important for Ellena, to with alarm. "Ah 1 Ellena," he added in a 

be immediatdy dedded upon; he departed softened voice, "should tears mingle with 

with only a faint assurance of encouragement, such moments as these ! Should your tears 

and she forbade him to return till the following fall upon my heart now ! They tell me that 

day, when she would acquaint him with her your consent Is given with reluctance— with 

final determination. grief ;^ that your love is feeble, your heart — 

This intend was, perhaps, the most pain- yes, Ellena 1 that your whole heart is no 

fal he had ever experienced. Alone, and on longer mine ! " 

the banks of the lake, he passed many hours " They ought rather to tell you," replied 

in alternate hope and fear : in endeavouring Ellena, " that it is all your own : that my 

to anticipate the decision on which seemed affection never was more powerful than now, 

suspended all his future peace, and abruptly when it can overcome every consideration 

recoiling from it as often as imagination re- with respect to your family, and urge me to a 

presented it to be adverse. step which must degrade me in their eyes — 

Of the walls that enclosed her, he scarcely and, I fear, in my own." 
ever lost sight ; the view of them seemed to "Oh, retract that crud assertion !" inter- 
cherish his nopes, and, while he gazed upon rupted Vivaldi. " Degrade you in your own I 
their mn;ed surface, Ellena alone was pictured — degrade you in your eyes I " He was much 
on his mncy ; till his anxiety to learn her agitated ; his countenance was flushed, and 
disposition towards him arose to agony, and an air of more than usual dignity dilated his 
he would abruptly leave the spot. But an figiure, while he added with energy : 
invisible spell still seemed to attract him back " 'Fhe time shall come, my Ellena, when 
again, and evening found him pacing slowly they shall understand your worth, and ac- 
beneath the shade of those mdancholy knowledge yoiu: excellence. Oh ! that I were 
boimdaries that concealed his Ellena. an emperor, that I might show to all the 

Her day was not more tranquil. Whenever world how much I love and honour you I " 
prudence and decorous pride forbade her to Ellena gave him her hand, and, withdraw- 

become a member of the Vivaldi family, as iujg^ her veil, smiled on him through her tears 

constantly did gratitude, affection, irresistible with gratitude and reviving courage, 
tenderness, plead the cause of Vivaldi. The Before Vivaldi retired from the convent, he 

memory of past times returned ; and the very obtained her consent to consult with an aged 

accents Of the deceased seemed to murmur Benedictine, whom he had engaged in his 

from the grave, and command her to fulfil the interest, as to the hour at which the marriage 

engagement which had soothed the dying might be solemnized with least observation, 

moments of Bianchi. The priest informed b\m >3aaX ^\. ^^ ^'o^- 

On the following morning, Vivaldi was at elusion of the ves^x ^rj\cfc >afc ^Qi>iA.X3fc 

ibe fates of the convent long before the disengaged; andlnaX, ^ VSafc ^t?X \iQ\a ^^«^ 

Mpfxdnted Aoar, and be lingered in torturing sunset \vas mote soWx^x^ V^oaxw «Ji«vQisx «k| 



66 



tt^E ITAtlAf^, 



other, the brotherhood being then assembled 
in the refectory, he would meet Vivaldi and 
Ellena at that time in a chapel on the edge 
of the lake, a short distance from the Bene- 
dictine convent to which it belonged, and 
celebrate their nuptials. 

With this proposal Vivaldi immediately 
returned to Ellena ; when it was agreed that 
the party should assemble at the hour men- 
tioned by the priest. Ellena, who had 
thought it proper to mention her intention to 
the abbess of the Ursalines, was, bv her per- 
mission, to be attended by a lay-sister ; and 
. Vivaldi was to meet her without the walls 
and conduct her to the altar. When the 
ceremony was over, the fugitives were to 
embark in a vessel hired for the purpose, 
and, crossing the lake, proceed towards 
Naples. Vivaldi again withdrew to engage 
a boat, and Ellena to prepare for the con- 
tinuance of her journey. 

As the appointed hour drew near, her 
spirits sunk, and she watched, with melan- 
choly foreboding, the sun retiring amidst 
stormy clouds, and his rays fading from the 
highest points of the mountains, till the 
gloom of twilight prevailed over the scene, 
bhe then left her apartment, took a grateful 
leave of the hospitable abbess, and, attended 
by the lay-sister, quitted the convent. 

Immediately without the gate she was met 
by Vivaldi, whose look, as he put her arm 
within his, gently reproached her for the 
dejection of her air. 

They walked in silence towards the chapel 
of San Sebastian. The scene appeared to 
sympathise with the spirits of Ellena. It was 
a' gloomy evening, and the lake, which broke 
in dark waves upon the shore, mingled its 
hollow sounds with those of the wind that 
bowed the lofty pines, and swept in g^sts 
among the rocks. She observed with ^arm 
the heavy thunderclouds that rolled along 
the sides of the mountains, and the birds 
circling swiftly over the waters and scudd- 
ing away to their nests among the cliffs, 
and she noticed to Vivaldi that, as a 
storm seemed approaching, she wished to 
avoid crossing the lake. He immediately 
ordered Paulo to dismiss the boat, and to be 
in waiting with a carriage, that, if the weather 
should become clear, they might not be 
detained longer than was otherwise necessary. 

As they approached the chapel, Ellena fixed 
her eyes on the mournful cypresses which 
waved over it, and sighed. "Those," she 
said, " are funeral mementoes — not such as 
should grace the altar of marriage I Vivaldi, 
I could be superstitious. Think you not 
they are portentous of future misfortime? 
But forgive me ; my spirits are weak." 

Vivaldi endeavoured to soothe her mind, 

and teodeiljr reproached ber for the sadness 

sAe indulged. Thus tb^ entered the chapel. 

Silence, and a kind of sfloomy sepulchral 



light prevailed within. The venerable Ben6* 
dlctine, and a brother who was to serve as 
guardian to the bride, were already there, but 
they were kneeling and engraged in prayer. 

Viv&ldi led the trembling Ellena to the 
altar, where they waited till the Benedictines 
should have finished, and these were mo- 
ments of great emotion. She often looked 
round the dusky chapel, in fearful ezpecta* 
tion of discovering some lurking observer ; 
and ihough she knew it to be very improbable 
that any person in this neighbourhood could 
be interested in interrupting the ceremony, 
her mind involuntarily admitted thepossibility 
of it. Once, indeed, as her eyes glanced 
over a casement, Ellena fancied she distin« 
guished a human face laid close to the glass, 
as if to watch what was passing within ; but 
when she looked again, the apparition was 
gone. Notwithstanding this, she listened 
with anxiety to the uncertain -sounds without, 
and sometimes started as the suiiges of the 
lake dashed over the rock below, almost be- 
lieving she heard the steps and whispering 
voices of men in the avenues of the chapel. 
She tried, however, to subdue api»ehension, 
by considering that, if this were true, a 
harmless curiosity might have attracted some 
inhabitants of the convent hither ; and her 
spirits became more composed, till she ob- 
served a door open a little way, and a dark 
countenance looking from behind it, In the 
next instant it retreated, and the door was 
closed. 

Vivaldi, who perceived Ellena's complexion 
change as she laid her hand on his arm, 
followed her eyes to the door ; but no person 
appearing, he inquired the cause of her alarm. 

" V/e are observed," said Ellena ; " some 
person appeared at that door I " 

"And if we are observed, my love," re- 
plied Vivaldi, "who is there in this neigh- 
bourhood whose observation we can have 
reason to fear ? Good father, despatch," he 
added, turning to the priest, " you forget 
that we are waiting." 

The officiating priest made a signal that he 
had nearly concluded his orison ; but the 
other brother rose immediately and spoke 
with Vivaldi, who desired that the doors 
of the chapel might be fastened to prevent 
intrusion. 

•* We dare not bar the gates of this holy 
temple," replied the Benedictine ; "it is a 
sanctuary, and never may be closed." 

*• But you will allow me to repress idle 
curiosity, ' said Vivaldi, " and to inquire who 
watches beyond that door? The tranquillity 
of this lady demands thus much. 

The brother assented, and Vivaldi stepped 
to the door ; but, perceiving no person 
in the obscure passage beyond it, he re- 
turned with lighter steps to the altar, from 
which the ofRciatiug v'^^ ^'^'*' ^^» 



THE ITAUAN. 



wait ; but an old man's prayers are not less 
important than a young man's vows, though 
this is not a moment when you will admit that 
truth." 

"I will allow whatever you please, good 
father," replied Vivaldi. " if you will admi- 
nister those vows without further delay ; time 
presses." 

The venerable priest took his station at the 
altar, and opened the book. .Vivaldi placed 
himself on his right hand, and with looks 
of anxious love, endeavoured to encourage 
EUena, who, with a dejected countenance, 
which her veil but ill concealed, and eyes 
fixed on the ground, leaned on her attendant 
sister. The figure and homely features of this 
sister ; the tall stature and harsh visage of 
the brother, clothed in the grey habit of his 
order ; the silvered head and placid physiog- 
nomy of the officiating priest, enlightened by 
a gleam from the lamp at)ove, opposed to the 
youthful grace and spirit of Viv^di, and the 
milder t)eauty and sweetness of EUena, formed 
altogether a group worthy of the pencil. 

The priest had t)^un the ceremony, when 
a noise from without again alarmed EUena, 
who observed the door once more cautiously 
opened, and a man bend forward his gigantic 
figure fh>m behind it. He carried a torch, 
and its glare, as the door gMdually unclosed, 
discovered other persons in the passage 
bejTond, looking forward over his shoulder 
into the chapel. The fierceness of their air, 
amid the strange peculiarity of their dress, in- 
stantly convinced EUena that they were not 
inhabitants of the Benedictine convent, but 
some terrible messengers of evil. Her half- 
stifled shriek alarmed Vivaldi, who caught her 
before she feU to the ground ; but as ne had 
not faced the door, he did not imderstand the 
occasion of her terror, till the sudden rush of 
footsteps made him turn, when he observed 
several men armed and very singularly ha- 
bited, advancing towards the altar. 

"Who is he that intrudes upon this sanc- 
tuary ? " he demanded, sternly, whUe he half 
rose from the ground where EUena had 
sunk. 

"What sacrilegious footsteps," cried the 
priest, •' thus rudely violate this holy place? " 

EUena was now insensible ; and the men 
continuing to advance, Vivaldi drew his sword 
to protect her. 

The priest and Vivaldi now spoke together, 
but the words of neither could be distin- 
guished, when a voice, tremendous from its 
loudness, like bursting thunder, dissipated the 
cloud of mystery. 

*' You, Vincentio di Vivaldi, and of Naples, " 
it said, *'and you, EUena di Rosalba, of Villa 
Altieri, we summon you to surrender, in the 
name of the most holy Inquisition I " 

"The Inquisition 1 " exclaimed Vivaldi, 
scarcely believing what he heard. "Here i^ 
womt ifistake i " 



The official repeated the summons without 
deigning to reply. 

Vivaldi, yet more astonished, added, " Do 
not imagine you can so far impose upon my 
credulity as that I can believe myself to have 
fallen within the cognizance of the Inquisi- 
Uon." 

' ' You may believe what you please, signor, " 
repUcd the chief officer ; " but you wtuA. that 
lady are our prisoners." 

" Begone, impostor 1 " said Vivaldi, spring- 
ing from the grouad, where he luul supported 
EUena, " or my sword shall teach you to repent 
your audacity I " 

"Do you insult an officer of the Inquisi- 
tion 1 " exclaimed the ruffian. " That holy 
commimity will inform you what you incur 
by resisting its mandate. ' 

The priest interrupted Vivaldi 's retort . "If 
you are reaUy officers of that tremendous 
tritmnal," he said, "produce some proof of 
your office. Remember this place is sanctified, 
and tremble for the consequence of imposition. 
You do wrong to believe that I wiU deliver up 
to you persons who have taken refuge here, 
widiout an unequivocal demand from that 
dread power." 

" Produce your form of summons," de- 
manded Vivaldi, with haughty impatience. 

"It is here," replied the official, drawing 
forth a black scroll, which he deUvered to the 
priest. " Read, and be satisfied 1 " 

The Benedictine started the instant he be- 
held the scroll, but he received and de- 
liberately examined it. The Idnd of parch- 
ment, the impression of the seal, the par- 
ticular form of words, the private signals, 
understood only by the initiated— aU seemed 
to announce this a true instrument of arresta- 
tion from the Holy Office. The scroll dropped 
from his hand, and he fixed his eyes, with 
surprise and unutterable compassion, upon 
Vivaldi, who stooped to reach the parchment, 
when it was snatched by the official. 

" Unhappy young man I " said the priest, 
"it is too true : you are summoned by that 
awful power to answer for your crime, and 
I am spared from the commission of a terrible 
offence 1 " 

Vivaldi appeared thunderstruck. " For 
what crime, holy father, am I called upon to 
answer? This is some bold and artful im- 
posture, since it can delude even you ! What 
crime?— what offence? " 

"I did not think you had been thus har- 
dened in guilt ! " repUed the priest. "Forbear ! 
add not me audacity of falsehood to the head- 
long passions of youth. You understand too 
weU your crime. " 

" Falsehood I " retorted Vivaldi. *' But your 
years, old mai{« and those sacred vestments 
protect you. For these ruffians, who have 
dared to implicate VY^aX \ti\w^<^x& NV:.^\m^ 
pointing vo EUexka, '' vev V3da Om^x^x^^ tiu^ 
nave )\»Uct fcom xa^ ivik^^ttA.^ 



88 



THE TTALIAN, 



•'Forbear ! forbear ! " said the priest, seiz- 
ing his arm ; ' ' have pity on yourself and on 
her. Know you not the punishment you 
incur from resistance ? " 

*• I know nor care not," replied Vivaldi ; 
" but I will defend Ellena di Rosalba to the 
last moment. Let them approach if they 
dare.*' 

* * It is on her, on her who lies senseless at 
your feet," said the priest, "that they will 
wreak their vengeance for these insults ; on 
her— the partner of yom: guilt." 

"The partner of my gfuilt!" exclaimed 
Vivaldi, with mingled astonishment and in- 
dignation ; " of my guilt ! " 

" Rash young man I does not the very veil 
she wears betray it ? I marvel how it could 
pass my observation ! " 

" You have stolen a nun from her convent," 
said the chief officer, "and must answer for 
the crime. When you have wearied yourself 
with these heroics, signor, you must go with 
us ; our patience is wearied already." 

Vivaldi observed, for the first time, that 
Ellena was shrouded in a nuns veil ; it was 
the one which Olivia had lent, to conceal her 
from the notice of the abbess, on the night of 
her departure from San Stefano, and which, 
in the hurry of that departure, she had for- 
gotten to leave with tihe recluse. During 
this interval, her mind had been too entirely 
occupied by cares and apprehension to allow 
her once to notice that the veil she wore was 
other than her usual one ; but it had been 
too well observed by some of the Ursaline 
sisters. 

Though he knew not how to account for 
the circumstance of the veil, Vivaldi began to 
perceive others which gave colour to the 
charge brought against him, and to ascertain 
the wide circumference of the snare that was 
spread around him. He fancied, too, that he 
perceived the hand of Schedoni employed 
upon it, and that his dark spirit was now 
avenging itself for the exposure he had 
suffered in the church of the Spirito Santo, 
and for all the consequent mortifications. As 
Vivaldi was ignorant of the ambitious hopes 
which the Marchesa had encouraged in 
Father Schedoni, he did not see the impro- 
bability that the confessor would have dared 
to hazard her favour by this arrest of her son ; 
much less could he suspect that Schedoni, 
having done so, had secrets in his possession 
which enabled him safely to defy her resent- 
ment, and bind her in silence to his decree. 

With the conviction that Schedoni's was 
the master-hand that directed the present 
manoeuvre, Vivaldi stood aghast, and gazing 
*^ silent unutterable anguish on EUena, who, 
as stje began to revive, stretched forth her 
i!«, .fT^''^'''*^^ ^^ called upon him to save 
Jl^ ;»^7 ° ."^',.^^.X« roe." said she, in accents 



l^'wmmc!''^'''''''''^'^ "' "° ^^^ ^^^i«yo^ 



At the sound of her voice he started from 
his trance ; and, turning fiercely upon the 
ruffians, who stood in sullen watchfulness 
around, bade them depart or prepare for his 
fury. At the same instant they adl drew their 
swords ; and the shrieks of Ellena, and the 
supplications of the officiating priest, were 
lost amidst the tumult of the comlxitants. 

Vivaldi, most unwilling to shed blood, 
stood merely on the defensive, till the violence 
of his antagonists compelled him to exert all 
his skill and strength. He then disabled one 
of the ruffians ; but his skill was insufficient 
to repel the other two, and he was nearly 
overcome, when steps were heard approach- 
ing, and Paulo rushed into the chapel. Per- 
ceiving his master beset, he drew his sword, 
and came furiously to his aid. He fought 
with unconquerable audacity and fierceness, 
till, nearly at the moment when his adver- 
sary fell, other ruffians entered the chapel. 
and Vivaldi, with his faithful servant, was 
wounded, and at length disarmed. 

Ellena, who had been withheld from throw- 
ing herself between the combatants, now, on 
observing that Vivaldi was wounded, re- 
newed her efforts for liberty, accompanied by 
such agony of supplication and complaint 
as almost moved to pity the hearts of the 
surrounding ruffians. 

Disabled by his wounds, and also held by 
his enemies, Vivaldi was compelled to witness 
her distress and danger without a hope of 
rescuing her. In frantic accents he called 
upon the old priest to protect her. 

" I dare not oppose the orders of the In- 
quisition," replied the Benedictine, "even if I 
had sufficient strength to defy its officials. 
Know you not, unhappy young man, that it 
is death to resist them ? ' 

"Death I " exclaimed Ellena ; " death ! " 

•* Ay, lady, too surely so ! ' 

" Signor, it would have been well for you," 
said one of the officers, "if you had taken 
my advice ; you will pay dearly' for what you 
have done," pointing to the ruffian who lay 
severely wounded on the ground. 

" My master will not have that to pay for, 
friend," said Paulo, "for if you must know, 
that is a piece of my work ; and if my arms 
were now at liberty, I would \xs if I could not 
match it among one of you, though I am so 
slashed." 

" Peace, good Paulo ! the deed was mine," 
said Vivaldi ; then addressing the official, 
" For myself I care not, I have done my duty 
— but for her I Can you look upon her, in- 
nocent and helpless as she is, and not relent ? 
Can you, will you, barbarians, drag her also 
to destruction, upon a charge too so daringly 
false?" 

" Our relenting would be of no service to 
her," replied the official ; " we must do our 
duty. Whether the charge is true or false^ 
she must ana^w lo \\ b^ioi^ Yist Yx^'^aa »" 



THE ITALIAN. 



89 



" What charge ? " demanded Ellena. 

•• The chaii^ of having broken your nun'a 
▼ow," replied the priest. 

Ellena raised her eyes to heaven. " Is it 
even so I '* she exclaimed. 

" You hear — she acknowledges the crime," 
said one of the ruffians. 

"She acknowledges no crime," replied 
Vivaldi; "she only perceives the extent of 
the malice that persecutes her. Oh 1 Ellena, 
must I then abandon you to their power? 
leave you for ever I " 

The agony of this thought reanimated 
him with momentary strength ; he burst from 
the grasp of the officials, and once more 
clasped Ellena to his bosom, who, unable to 
speak, wept with the anguish of a breaking 
heart, as her head sunk upon his shoulder. 
The ruffians around them so far respected 
their grief that, for a moment, they did not 
interrupt it. 

Vivaldi's exertion was transient ; faint from 
*sorrow, and from loss of blood, he became 
unable to support himself, and was compelled 
again to relinquish Ellena. 

" Is there no help ? " said she, with agony ; 
" will you suffer him to expire on the 
ground?" 

The priest directed that he should be con- 
veyed to the Benedictine convent, where his 
wounds might be examined, and medical aid 
administer^. The disabled ruffians were 
already carried thither ; but Vivaldi refused 
to go, unless Ellena might accompany him. 
It was contrary to the rules of the place that 
a woman should enter it ; and before the 
priest could reply, his Benedictine brother 
eagerly said that they dared not transgress 
the law of the convent. 

Ellena's fears for Vivaldi entirely over- 
coming those for herself, she entreated that 
he would suffisr himself to be conveyed to the 
Benedictines : but he could not be prevailed 
with to leave her. The officials, howeva:, 
prepared to separate them. Vivaldi in vain 
urged the useless cruelty of dividing him 
from Ellena, if, as they had hinted, she also 
was to be carried to the Inquisition ; and as 
ineffectually demanded whither they really 
designed to take her. 

"We shall take good careof her, signer," 
said an officer ; "that is sufficient for you. 
It signifies nothing whether you are going the 
same way ; you must not go together." 

"Why, did you ever hear, signor, of ar- 
rested persons being suffered to remain in 
company?" said anoimer ruffian. "Fine plots 
they would lay ! I warrant they would not 
contradict each other's evidence a little." 

"You shall not separate me from my 
master, though," vociferated Paulo. " I 
demand to l^ sent to the Inquisition with 
him, or to the devil, but all is one for that." 

"Fair and softly," replied the officer; 
"you shall be sent to the Inquisition first, 



and to the devil afterwards ; you must be 
tried before you are condemned." 

"But waste no more time," he added to 
his followers, and pointing to Ellena, " away 
with her." 

As he said this, they lifted Ellena in their 
arms. " Let me loose 1 " cried Paulo, when he 
saw they were carryirifi: her from the place, 
" let me loose, I say I " and the violence of 
his struggles burst asunder the cords which 
held him ; a vain release, for he was instantly 
seized again. 

Vivaldi, already exhausted by the loss of 
blood and the anguish of his mind, made, 
however, a last effort to save her ; he tried 
to raise himself f^om the ground, but a 
sudden film came over his sight, and his 
senses forsook him, while yet the name of 
Ellena faltered on his lips. 

As they bore her from the chapel, she con- 
tinued to call upon Vivaldi, and alternately to 
supplicate that she might once more behold 
him, and take one last adieu. The ruffians 
were inexorable, and she heard his voice no 
more, for he no longer heard — no longer was 
able to reply to hers. 

" Oh ! once again 1 " she cried in agony. 
"jOne word, Vivaldi I Let me hear the sound 
of your voice yet once again 1 " But it was silent. 

As she quitted the chapel, with eyes still 
bent towards the spot where he lay, she ex- 
claimed, in the piercing accents of despair, 
" Farewell, Vivsddi I Oh I for ever — ever, 
fiareweU I " 

The tone in which she pronounced the last 
" farewell ! " was so touching that even the 
cold heart of the priest could not resist it ; 
but he impatiently wiped away the few tears 
that rushed into his eyes before they were ob- 
served. Vivaldi heard it — it seemed to arouse 
him from death !— he heard her mournful 
voice for the last time, and, turning his eyes, 
saw her veil floating away through the portal 
of the chapel. AU suffering, all effort, all 
resistance was vain ; the ruffians bound him, 
bleeding as be was, and conveyed him to 
the Benedictine convent, together with the 
wounded Paulo, who unceasingly vociferated 
on the way thither, " I demand to be sent to 
the Inquisition ! I demand to be sent to the 
Inquisition 1 " 

CHAPTER XVII. 

THE wounds of Vivaldi and of his servant 
were pronounced, by the Benedictine 
who had examined and dressed them, to be 
not dangerous, but those of one of the ruffians 
were declared doubtful. Some few of the 
brothers displayed much compassion and 
kindness towards the prisoners ; but the 
greater part seemed fearful of expressing any 
degree of sympathy foi "^TSiofts niVci \iaA. 
fallen wilhin. Ae eo\^mzax^<ci& oS. ^^ ^?2-> 
Office, and evetv V-eplaXocA Itom \Jaa K^aaas&wt 



90 THB ITAUAN. 

in which they were confined. To this self- plains that surround Rome, and he under- 
restriction, however, they were not long sub- stood, for the first time, that he was going to 
jected ; for Vivaldi and Paulo were compelled the prisons of the Inquisition in that city, 
to begin their journey as soon as some short The travellers descended upon the Campania| 
resthad sufficiently revived them. They were and then rested for a few hours at a small 
placed in the same carriage, but the presence town on its borders. 

of two officers prevented all interchange of When they again set forward, Vivaldi per- 
conjecture as to the destination of EUena, ceived that the guard was changed, the officer 
and with respect to the immediate occasion who had remained with him in the apartment 
of their misfortune. Paulo, indeed, now and of the inn only appearing among the new 
then hazarded a surmise, and did not scruple faces which surrounded him. The dress and 
to affirm that the abbess of San Stefano was manners of these men diifered considerably 
their chief enemy ; that the Carmelite friars, from those of the other. Their conduct was 
who had overtaken them on the road, were more temperate, but their countenances ex- 
her agents ; and that, having traced their pressed a darker cruelty, mingled with a sly 
route, they had given intelligence where demureness, and a solemn self-importance 
Vivaldi and Ellena mi ght be found. that announced them at once as belonging to 

"I guessed we never should escape the the Inquisition. Theywere almost invariably 
abbess," said Paulo, "though I would not silent ; and when they did speak, it was only 
disturb you, signor mio, nor the poor lady in a few sententious words. To the abound- 
EUena, by saying so. But your abbesses are ing questions of Paulo, and the few earnest 
as cunning as Inquisitors, and are so fond of entreaties of his master to be informed of the 
governing that thev had rather, like them, place of Ellena's destination, they made not ' 
send a man to the devil than send him the least reply ; and listened to all the 
nowhere." flourishing speeches of the servant against 

Vivaldi gave Paulo a si^ificant look, which Inquisitors and the Holy Office with the most 
was meant to repress his imprudent loquacity, profound gravity. 

and then sank again into silence and the atis- Vivaldi was struck with the circumstance of 
tractions of deep grief. The officers, mean- the guard being changed, and still more with 
while, never spoke, but were observant of all the appearance of the party who now com- 
that Paulo said, who perceived their watch- posed it. When he compared the manners 
fulness; but because he despised them as spies, of the late, with those of the present, guard, 
he thoughtlessly despised them also as ene- he thought he discovered in the first the mere 
mies, and was so far from concealing opinions ferocity of ruffians ; but in the latter, the prin- 
which they might repeat to his prejudice, that ciples of cunning and cruelty which seemed 
he had a pride in exaggerating them and in particularly to characterise Inquisitors. He 
daring the worst which the exasperated tem- was inclined to believe that a stratagem had 
pers of these men, shut up in the same car- enthralled him, and that now, for the first time, 
riage with him, and compelled to hear what- he was in the custody of the Holy Office. 
ever he chose to say against the Institution to It was near midnight when the prisoners 
which they belonged, could effect. Whenever entered Porto del Popolo, and found them- 
Vivaldi, recalled from his abstraction by some selves in the midst of the Carnival at Rome, 
bold assertion, endeavoured to check his im- The Corso, through which they were obliged 
prudence, Paulo was contented to solace his to pass, was crowded with gay carriages and 
conscience, instead of protecting himself, by masks, with processions of musicians, monks, 
saying, "It is their own fault ; they would and mounteoanks ; was lighted up with in- 
thrust themselves into my company ; let them numerable tapers and flambeaux, and re- 
have enough of it ; and, if ever they take me sounded with the heterogeneous rattling of 
before their reverences the Inquisitors, tkey wheels, the music of serenaders, and the jokes 
shall have enough of it too. I will play up and laughter of the revellers, as they sportively 
such a tune in the Inquisition as is not heard threw about their su|^ar-plums. The heat 
there every day. I will jingle all the bells on of the weather made it necessary to have the 
their fools' caps, and tell them a little honest windows of the coach open ; and the prisoners 
truth, if they make me smart for it ever so." therefore, saw all that passed without. It 

Vivaldi, aroused once more, and seriously was a scene which contrasted cruelly with 
alarmed for the consequences which honest the feelings and circumstances of Vivaldi ; 
Paido might be drawing upon himself, now torn as he was from her he most loved, in 
insisted on his silence, and was obeyed. dreadful uncertainty as to her fate, and him« 

They travelled during the whole night, self about to be brought before a tribunal 
stopping only to change horses. At every whose mysterious and terrible proceedings 
post-house Vivaldi looked for a carriage that appalled even the bravest spirits. Altogether 
might enclose Ellena, but none appeared, nor this was one of the most striking examples 
tan sotmd of wheels told him that she followed, which the chequer-work of human life could 

W i^ the morning l^ght he penceived the show, or human feelings endure. Vivaldi 
€imaeofSt Peter appealing fylntly orer the sickened as lie loolud upon the sptendid 



THE ITALIAN. 91 

crowd, while the carriage made its way slowly But the illusion wu transient ; his own mis* 

with it ; but Paolo, as he gazed, was remiuded fortunes press^ too heavily upon him to be 

of the Corso of Naples, such as it appeared long unfelt. and his enthusiasm vanished like 

at the time of Carnival ; and, comparins^ the the moonlight. 

present scene with his native one, he found A returning gleam lighted up. soon after, 
fault with everything he beheld. The dresses the rude and extensive area which Uie car- 
were tasteless, the equipages without splen- riage was crossing. It appeared, from its 
dour, the people without spirit ; yet, such was desolation, and the ruins scattered distantly 
the propensity of his heart to sympathise with along its skirts, to be a part of the city en- 
whatever was gay, that for some moments he tirely abandoned by the modem inhabitanu 
forgot that he was a prisoner on his way to the to the remains of iu former grandeur. Not 
Inq[uiBition ; almost forgot that he was a Near one shadow of a human bemg crossed the 
pohtan ; and while he exclaimed against the waste, nor any buikling appeared whk:h 
dulness of a Roman Carnival, would have might be supposed to shelter an inhabitant, 
sprung through the carriage window to partake The deep tone of a bell, however, rolling on 
of its spirit, if his fetters and his wounds had the silence of the night, announced the 
not withheld him, A deep sigh from Vivaldi haunts of man to be not far off ; and Vivaldi 
recalled his wandering imagination ; and when then perceived in the distance, to which he 
he noticed again the sorrow in his master's was approaching, an extent of lofty walls 
look, all bis lightly joyous spuits fled. and towers that, as far as the gloom would 

"My moistro^ my dear maestro t*' he permit his eye to penetrate, bounded the 

said, and knew not how to finish what he horison. He judged these to be the prisons 

wished to express. of the Inquisition. Paulo pointed them out 

At that moment they passed the theatre at the same moment. "Ah, signer 1" said 

of San Carlo, the doors of which were he, despondmgly, " that is the placet what 

thronged with equipages, where Roman strength I If. my lord, the old Marchese were 

ladies in their gala l^bits, courtiers in but to see where we are going 1 Ah " 

their lieuitastic dresses and masks of all He concluded with a deep sigh, and sunk 

descriptions, were hasteoing to the opera, again into the state of apprehension and 

In the midst of this gay busde, where mute expectation which he had suflered from 

the carriage was unable to proc^, the the moment that he quitted the Corso. 
officials (» the Inquisition looked on in The carriage, having reached the walls, 

solemn sUenoe, not a muscle of their features followed their bandings to a considerable 

relaxing in sympathy or yielding a single extent. These walls, of immense height, and 

wrinkle of the self-importance that lifted their strengthened by innumerable massy bulwarks, 

brows ; and, while they regarded with secret exhibited neither window nor grate, but a vast 

contempt those who could be thus lightly and dreary blank ; a small round tower only, 

plrased, the people, in return, more vdsely, perched here and there upon the summit, 

perhaps, regarded with contempt the proud breaking their monotony, 
moroseness that refused to partake of inno- The prisoners passed what seemed to be 

cent pleasures because they were trifling, and the principal entrance, from the grandeur of 

shrank from countenances furrowed with the its portal and the gigantic loftiness of the 

sternness of cruelty. But, when their ofiice towers that rose over it ; and soon after the 

was distinguished, part of the crowd pressed carriage stopped at an archway in the walls, 

bade from the carnage in afiright while an« strongly b^ricadoed. One of the escort 

other part advanced with curiosity ; though, alighted, and, having struck upon the bars, a 

as the majority retreated, space was left for folding door within was immediately opened, 

the coach to move on. After quitting the and a man bearing a torch appeared behind 

Corso it proceeded for some miles through the barricado, whose countenance, as he 

daric and deserted streets, where only here looked through it, might have been copied 

and there a lamp, hung on high before the for the " Grim-visaged comfortless despair " 

image of a saint, shed its glimmering light, of the poet. 

and where a melancholy and universal silence No words were exchanged between him 

prevailed. At intervals, indeed, the moon, as and the guard ; but on perceiving who were 

the clouds passed away, showed for a mo- without, be opened the iron gate, and the 

ment some of those mighty monuments of prisoners, having alighted,passed with the two 

Rome's eternal name, those sacred ruins, oflicials beneath the arch, the guard following 

those gigantic skeletons which once enclosed with a torch. They descended a flight of 

a sool whose energies governed a world 1 broad steps, at the foot of which another iron 

Even Vivaldi could not behold with indiffer- gate admitted them to a kind of hall ; such, 

ence the grandeur of these relics, as the rays however, it at first appeared to Vivaldi, as 

fell upon Uie hoary walls and columns ; or his eyes glanced through its gloomy extent, 

pasa among those scenes of ancient story imperfectly ascertaining it by iK'&V'dbXix^^iVivdQk 

without feeling a melancholy awe, a sacred hung from the cenlte ol \h^ tool, '^o^^^icscw 

enthusiasm, that inihdxew him from bimaeiL appeared, and a deaXYi^<& ^uca v^«n^^\ 



92 THE ITALIAN, 

lot neither the officials nor the guard yet stamped with the characters of demons. V\* 
spoke ; nor did any distant sound contradict valdi could not look upon the grave cruelty 
the notion, which soon occurred, that they or the ferocious impatience their countenances 
were traversing the chambers of the dead, severally expressed without reading in them 
To Vivaldi it appearcxl that this was one of the fate of some fellow-creature, the fate which 
the burial vaults of the victims who suffered these men seemed going even at this moment 
in the Inquisition, and his whole frame to confirm ; and, as they passed with sound- 
thrilled with horror. Several avenues, open- less steps, he shrunk from observation, as if 
ing from the apartment, seemed to lead to their very looks possessed some supernatural 
distant quarters of this immense fabric, but power and could have struck death. But he 
still no footstep whispering along the pave- followed their fleeting figiures, as they piro- 
ment, or voice murmuring through the arched ceeded on their work of horror, to where tiie 
roofs, indicated it to be the residence of the last glimmering ray faded into datkness, ez« 
living. pecting to see other doors of other chambers 

Having entered one of the passages, Vivaldi open to receive them. While meditatins^ 
perceived a person clothed in blac^. and who upon these horrors, Vivaldi lost every sdfis£ 
bore a lighted taper, crossing silently in the consideration in astonishment and indignation 
remote perspective ; and he understood too at the sufferings which the frenzied wicked- 
well from his habit that he was a member of ness of man prepares for man, who, even at 
this dreadful tribunal. the moment of infliction, insults his victim 

The sound of footsteps seemed to reach with assertions of the justice and necessity of 
the stranger, for he turned, and paused such procedure. "Is this possible?" said 
while the officers advanced. They then made Vivaldi, internally. " Can tnis be in human 
signs to each other, and exchsmged a few nature? Can such horrible perversion of 
words, which neither Vivaldi nor his servant r^ht be permitted ? Can man, who calls 
could understand, when the stranger, point- himself endowed with reason, and immeasur- 
ing with his taper along another avenue, ably superior to every other created being, 
passed away. Vivaldi followed him with his argue himself into the commission of such 
eyes till a door at the extremity of the passage horrible folly, such inveterate cruelty, as ex- 
opened, and he saw the Inquisitor enter an ceeds all the acts of the most irrational and 
apartment whence a great light proceeded, ferocious brute? Brutes do not deliberatdy 
and where several other figures, habited like slaughter their species ; it remains for man 
himself, appeared waiting to receive him. only, man, proud of his prerogative of rea- 
The door immediately closed ; and, whether son, and boasting of his sense of justice, to 
the imagination of Vivaldi was affected, or unite the most terrible extremes of folly and 
that the sounds were real, he thought, as it wickedness ! " 

closed, he distinguished half stifled groans, Vivaldi had been no stranger to the exist- 
as of a person in agony. ence of this tribunal ; he had long understood 

The avenue, through which the prisoners the nature of the establishment, and had 
passed, opened, at length, into an apartment often received particular accounts of its cus- 
gloomy like the first they had entered, but toms and laws ; but, though he had believed 
more extensive. The roof was supported by before, it was now only that conviction ap- 
arches, and long arcades branched off from peared tojmpress his understanding. A new 
every side of the chamber, as from a central view of human nature seemed to burst at once 
point, and were lost in the gloom, which the upon his mind, and he could not have expe- 
rays of the small lamps, suspended in each, rienced greater astonishment if this had been 
but feebly penetrated. the first moment in which he had h^ird of 

They rested here, and a person soon after the institution. But when he thought of 
advanced, who appeared to be the gaoler, Ellena, considered that she was in the power 
into whose hands Vivaldi and Paulo were de- of this tribunal, and that it was probable she 
livered. A few mysterious words having been was at this moment within the same dreadful 
exchanged, one of the officials crossed the walls, grief, indignation, and despair irritated 
hall and ascended a wide staircase, while the him almost to frenzy. He seemed suddenly 
other, with the gaoler and the guard, remained animated with supernatural strength, and 
below, as if awaiting his return. ready to attempt impossibilities for her de- 

A long interval eUipsed, during which the liverance. It was by a strong effort of self- 
stillness of the place was sometimes inter- command that he forbore bursting the bonds 
rupted by a closing door, and, at others, by which held him, and making a desperate at- 
indistinct sounds, which yet appeared to Vi- tempt to seek her through the vast extent of 
valdi like lamentations and extorted groans, these prisons. Reflection, however, had not 
Inquisitors, in their long black robes, issued so entirely forsaken him but that he saw the 
from time to time from the passages, and impossibihty of succeeding in such an effort 
crossed the hall to other avenueSv They eyed the moment he had conceived it, and he for- 
the prisoners with curiosity, but without pity, bore to rush upon the certain destruction 
72ie/r risag^es, with few exceptions, seemed to which it must have led. His passions. 



THE ITALIAN. 



93 



thus restrained, seemed to become virtues, 
and to display themselves in the energy of his 
courage and his fortitude. His soul became 
stem and v^orous in despair, and his manner 
and coontenanoe assumed a calm dignity 
which awed, in some degree, even his guards. 
The pain of his wounds was no longer felt ; 
it appeared as if the strength of his intellec- 
tual self had subdued the infirmities of the 
body, and, perhaps, in these moments of ele- 
vation, he could have endured the torture 
without shrinking. 

Paulo, meanwhile, mute and grave, was 
watchful of all that passed ; he observed the 
revolatioas in his master's mind with grief 
first and then with surprise, but he could not 
imitate the noble fortitude which now gave 
weight and steadiness to Vivaldi's thoughts. 
And when he looked on the power and gloom 
around him, and on the visages of the passing 
Inquisitors, he b^an to repent that he had 
so freely delivered his opinion of this tri- 
bunal in the presence of its agents, and to 
perceive that, if he played up the kind of 
tune he had threatened, it would probably be 
the last he should ever be permitted to per- 
form in this world. 

At length the chief officer descended the 
staircase, aud immediately bade Vivaldi to 
foUow Um. Paulo was accompanying his 
master, but was withheld by the guard, and 
told he was to t)e disposed of in a different 
way. Iliis was the moment of his severest 
trial ; he declared he would no( be separated 
from his master. 

"What (Ud I demand to be brought here 
for," he cried, " if it was not that I might go 
shares with the signor in all his troubles? 
This is not a place to come to for pleasure, I 
warrant ; and I can promise ye, gentlemen, 
I would not have come within a hundred 
miles of you if it had not been for my master's 
sake." 

The guards roiighly interrupted him, and 
were carrying him away, when Vivaldi's 
commanding voice interrupted them. He 
returned to speak a few words of consola- 
tion to his faithful servant, and, since 
they were to be separated, to take leave of 
him. 

Paulo embraced his knees, and, while he 
wept, and his words were almost stifled by 
sobs, declared that no force should drag him 
from his master while he had life ; and re- 
peatedly appealed to the guards with — 
"What did I demand to be brought here 
for? Did ever anybody come here to seek 
pleasure? What right have you to prevent 
my going shares with my master in his 
troubles?" 

"We do not intend to deny you that 
pleasure, friend," replied one of the guards. 

" Don't you? Then heaven bless you I " 
cried Paulo, springing from his knees, and 
shaking the man by the haad mih a violence 



that would nearly have dislocated the shoulder 
of a person less robust. 

" So come with us," added the guard, 
dragging him away from Vivaldi. Paulo now 
became outrageous, and, struggling with the 
guards, burst from them, and again fell at 
the feet of his master, who raised and em- 
braced him, endeavouring to prevail with him 
to submit quietly to what was inevitable, and 
to encourage him with hope. 

" I trust that our separation will be short," 
said Vivaldi/ "and that we shall meet again 
in happier circumstances. My innocence 
must soon appear." 

"We shall never, never meet i^ain, signor 
mio, in this world," said Paulo, sobbing 
violently, "so don't make me hope so. That 
old abbi^ knows what she is about too well 
to let us escape, or she would not have catched 
us up so cunningly as she did ; so what sig- 
nifies innocence I Oh, if my old lord, the 
Marchese, did but know where we are 1 " 

Vivaldi interrupted him, and turning to 
the guards, said, "I recommend m^ faithful 
servant to your compassion ; he is mnocent. 
It will some time, perhaps, be in my power to 
recompense you for any indulgence you may 
allow him, and I shall value it a thousand 
times more highly than any you could show 
to myself I farewell, Paulo—farewell ! Offi- 
cer, I am ready." 

" Oh stay ! signor, for one moment— stay 1" 
said Paulo. 

" We can wait no longer," said the guard, 
and again drew Paulo away, who, looking 
piteously after Vivaldi, alternately repeated, 
* ' Farewell, dear maestro I farewell, dear, dear 
maestro/" and "What did I demand to be 
brought here for ? What did I demand to be 
brought here for ?— what was it for, if not to 
go shares with my maestro f" till Vivaldi was 
beyond the reach of sight and of hearing. 

Vivaldi, having followed the officer up the 
staircase, passed through a gallery to an ante- 
chamber, where, being delivered into the 
custody of some persons in waiting, his con- 
ductor disappeared beyond a folding door 
that led to an inner apartment. Over this 
door was an inscription in Hebrew characters, 
traced in blood-colour. Dante's inscription 
on the entrance of the infernal regions would 
have been suitable to a place where every 
circumstance and feature seemed to say, 
" Hope, that comes to ally comes not here I " 

Vivaldi conjectured that in this chamber 
they were preparing for him the instruments 
which were to extort a confession ; and, though 
he knew little of the regular proceedings ol 
this tribunal, he had always understood that 
the torture was inflicted upon the accused 
person till he made confession of the crime 
of which he was suspected. By such a mode 
of proceeding, the innocent were certaiw ^i 
suffering longer Ibati \Yi^ ?:v]l'^Vj », lat» ^s^Ocsr?? 
had nothing to confess, \)aft \xic^\^\\.Qt,\«s:>ap 



94 



THE ITALIAN, 



taking innocence for obstinacy, persevered in 
his inflictions, and it frequently happened 
that he compelled the innocent to become 
criminal, and assert a falsehood, that they 
might be released from anguish which they 
could no longer sustain. Vivaldi considered 
this circumstance undauntedly ; every faculty 
of his soul was bent up to nrmness and en- 
durance. He believed that he understood 
the extent of the charge which would be 
brought against him, a charge as false as a 
specious confirmation of it would be terrible 
in its consequence both to EUena and himself. 
Yet every art would be practised to bring him 
to an acicnowledgment of having carried oif 
a nun, and he knew also that since the prose- 
cutor and the witnesses are never confronted 
with the prisoner in cases of severe accusation, 
and since their very names are concealed from 
him, it would be scarcely possible for him to 
prove his innocence. But he did not hesitate 
an instant whether to sacrifice himself for 
Ellena, determining rather to expire beneath 
the merciless inflictions of the Inquisitors 
than to assert a falsehood which must involve 
her in destruction. 

The officer at length appeared, and having 
beckoned Vivaldi to advance, uncovered his 
head, and bared his arms. He then led him 
forward through the folding door into the 
chamber ; having done which, he immediately 
withdrew, and the door, which shut out Hope, 
closed after him. 

Vivaldi found himself in a spacious apart- 
ment, where only two persons were visible, 
who were seated at a large table that occupied 
the centre of the room. They were both 
habited in black ; the one, who seemed by his 
piercing eye, and extraordinary physiognomy, 
to be an Inquisitor, wore on bis head a kind 
of black turban, which heightened the natural 
ferocity of his visage : the other was uncovered 
and his arms bared to the elbows. A book, 
with some instruments of singular appearance 
lay before him. Rouai the table were several 
unoccupied chairs, on the backs of which 
appeared figurative signs ; at the upper end 
of the apartment a gigantic crucifix stretched 
nearly to the vaulted roof ; and at the lower 
end, suspended from an arch in the wall, was 
a dark curtain, but whether it veiled a window, 
or shrouded some object or person necessary 
to the designs of the Inquisitor, there were 
little means of judging. It was, however, 
suspended from an arch such as sometimes 
contains a casement, or leads to a deep recess. 

The Inquisitor called on Vivaldi to advance, 
and, when he had reached the table, put a 
book into his hands, and bade him swear to 
reveal the truth and keep for ever secret 
whatever he might see or hear in the apart- 
ment. Vivaldi hesitated to ob^ so un- 
qualified a command. The Inquisitor re- 
minded him, by a look not to be mistaken, 
tliathewas absolute here ; but Vivaldi still 



hesitated. "Shall I consent to my owa 
condemnation?" said he to himself. "The 
malice of demons like these may convert the 
most innocent circumstances into matter of 
accusation for my destruction, and I must 
answer whatever questions they chooee to 
ask. And shall I swear, also, to conceal 
whatever I may witness in this charabor, 
when I know that the most diatx>lical crud* 
ties are hourly practised here? " 

The Inquisitor, in a voice which would 
have made a heart less fortified than was 
Vivaldi's tremble, again commanded him to 
swear ; at the same time, he made a signal to 
the person who sat at the opposite end of the 
table, and who appeared to be an inferior 
officer. 

Vivaldi was still silent, but he began to 
consider that, unconscious as he was of 
crime, it was scarcely possible for his words 
to be tortured into a self-accusation ; and 
that, whatever he might witness, no retribu- 
tion would be prevented, no evil withh^d, by 
the oath whicn bound him to secrecy, since 
his most severe denunciation could avail no- 
thing against the supreme power oi this 
tribunal. As he did not perceive any good 
which could arise from refusing the oath, and 
saw much immediate evil from resistance, he 
consented to receive it. Notwithstanding 
this, when he put the book to his lips, and 
uttered the tremendous vow prescribed to 
him, hesitadon and reluctance returned upon 
his mind, and an icy coldness struck to his 
heart. He was so much affected that cirw 
cumstances, apparently the most trivial, had 
at this moment influence upon his imagina- 
tion. As he accidentally threw his eyes upon 
the curtain, which he had observed before 
without emotion, and now thought it moved, 
he almost started in expectation of seeing 
some person, an Inquisitor, perhaps, as 
terrific as the one before him, or an accuser 
as malicious as Schedoni, steal from be- 
hind it. 

The Inquisitor having administered the 
oath, and the attendant having noted it in 
his book, the examination began. After de- 
manding, as is usual, the names and titles 
of Vivaldi and his family and his place of 
residence, to which he fully replied, the In- 
quisitor asked whether he understood the 
nature of the accusation on which he had 
been arrested. 

" The order for my arrestation informed 
me," replied Vivaldi. 

' ' Look to your words ," said the Inquisitor, 
" and remember your oath. Whal was the 
ground of accusation ? " 

" I understood," said Vivaldi, "that I was 
accused of having stolen a nun from her 
sanctuary." 

A faint degree of surprise appeared on the 
brow of the Inquisitor. "You confess it, 
then ? " he said, after the pause of a moment, 



THB ITALIAN. 



95 



and making; a sknal to the secretary, who 
immediately noted Vivaldi's words. 

'• I solonnly deny it," replied Vivaldi. 
" The accusation is false and malicious." 

" Remember the oath you have taken ! " 
repeated the Inquisitor. "Learn also, that 
mercy is shown to such as make full confes- 
sk)n ; but that the torture is applied to thos« 
who have the folly and the obstinacy to with- 
hold the truth." 

••If you torture me till I acknowledge the 
justness of this accusation," said Vivaldi, '• I 
must expire under your inflictions, for suffer- 
ing never shall compel me to assert a false- 
hood. It is not the truth which you seek ; 
it is not the guilty whom you punish ; the 
innocent, having no crimes to confess, are the 
victims of your cruelty, or, to escape from it, 
become criminal, and proclaim a lie." 

••Recollect yourself," said the Inquisitor, 
sternly. * ' You are not brought hither to ac- 
cuse, but to answer accusation. You say you 
are innocent, yet acknowledge yourself to 
be acquainted with the subject of the charge 
wtiich is to be urged against you 1 How 
could you know Uiis, but from the voice of 
conscience ? " 

*• From the words of your own summons," 
replied Vivaldi, "and from those of your 
omcials who arrested me." 

" How ! " exclaimed the Inquisitor. '* Note 
that," pointing to the secretary ; " he savs by 
the words of our siunmons : now, we know 
that you never read that summons. He says 
also DY the words of our officials ; it appears, 
then, he is ignorant that death would follow 
such a breach of confidence." 

'* It is true I never did read the summons," 
relied Vivaldi, "and as true that I never 
asserted I did ; the friar, who read it, told of 
what it accused me, and your officials con- 
firmed the testimony." 

•• No mc»:e of this equivocation 1 " said the 
Inquiator. •* Speak only to the question." 

•• I wQl not suffer my assertions to be mis- 
represented," replied Vivaldi, •• or my words 
to be perverted against myself. I have sworn 
to sp^k the truth only ; since you believe I 
violate my oath, and doubt my direct and 
simple words, I will speak no more." 

llie Inquisitor half rose from his chair, and 
his countenance grew paler. "Audacious 
heretic I " he said, •• will you dispute, insult, 
and disobey the commands of oiu: most holy 
tribunal I You will be taught the consequence 
of your desperate impiety. To the torture 
wiOi him I " 

A stem smile was on the features of Vivaldi : 
his eyes were calmly fixed on the Inquisitor, 
and his attitude was undaunted and firm. 
His courage, and the cool contempt which 
his looks expressed, seemed to touch his 
examiner, who perceived that he had not a 
common mind to operate upon. He aban- 
donedy thetelbre^ for the present, /errific 



measures, and, resuming his usual manner, 
proceeded in the examination. 

"Where were you arrested? " 

"At the chapel of San Sebastian, on the 
lake of Celano. 

"You are certain as to this?" asked the 
Inquisitor ; "you are sure it was not at the 
village of Legano, on the high road between 
Celano and Rome ? " 

Vivaldi, while he confirmed his assertion, 
recollected with some surprise that Legano 
was the place where the guard had been 
changed, and he mentioned the circumstance. 
The Inquisitor, however, proceeded in his 
questions without appearing to notice it. 
" Was any person arrested with you ? " 

••You cannot be ignorant," replied Vi- 
valdi, "thatSignora di Rosalba was seized 
at the same time, upon the false charge of 
t>eing a nun who had broken her vows and 
eloped from her convent ; nor that Paulo 
Mendrico, my faithful servant, was also made 
a prisoner, though upon what pretence he was 
arrested I am utterly i^orant." 

The Inquisitor remained for some moments 
in thoughtful silence, and then inquired 
slightly concerning the family of Ellena and 
her usual place of residence. Vivaldi, fear- 
ful of making some assertion that might be 
prejudicial to her, referred him to herself; 
but the inquiry was repeated. 

"She is now within these walls," replied 
Vivaldi, hoping to learn from the manner of 
his examiner whether hig fears were just, 
" and can answer these questions better than 
myself." 

The Inquisitor merely bade the notary 
write down her name, and then remained for 
a few moments meditating. At length he 
said, " Do you know where you now are ? " 

Vivaldi, smiling at the question, replied, 
' ' I understand that I am in the prisons of 
the Inquisition, at Rome.' 

• • Do you know what are the crimes that 
subject persons to the cognizance of the Holy 
Office?" 

Vivaldi was alent. 

•• Your conscience informs you, and your 
silence confirms me. Let me admonish you, 
once more, to make a full confession of your 
guilt ; remember that this is a merciful tri- 
bunal, and shows favour to such as acknow- 
ledge their crimes." 

Vivaldi smiled sarcastically ; the Inquisitor 
proceeded. 

•• It does not resemble some severe, yet 
just, courts, where immediate execution fol- 
lows the confession of a criminal. No ! it is 
merciful ; and though it punishes guilt, it 
never applies the torture but in cases of ne- 
cessity, when the obstinate silence of the 
prisoner requires such a measure. You see, 
theredfore, what you may avovi^^tA\i\^\.^^N\. 
may expect." 

** But if thb pin%CA!St \kdJ& xl^^tOd^ V^ ^^"^ 



96 



THE ITALIAN. 



fess ? " said Vivaldi. " Can your tortures 
make him guilty ? They may indeed force a 
weak mind to be guilty of falsehood ; and to 
escape present anguish, a man may unwarily 
condemn himself to the death ! But you will 
find that I am not such a one." 

"Young man," replied the Inquisitor, 
' • you will understand too soon that we never 
act but upon sure authority ; and will wish, 
too late, that you bad made an honest con- 
fession. Your silence cannot keep from us a 
knowledge of your oifenccs ; we are in pos- 
session of facts, and your obstinacy can 
neither wrest from us the truth nor pervert it. 
Your most secret offences are already written 
on the tablets of the Holy Office ; your con- 
science cannot reflect them more justly. 
Tremble, therefore, and revere. But under- 
stand that though we have sufficient proof of 
your guilt, we require you to confess : and 
that the punishment of obstinacy is as certain 
as that of any other offence." 

Vivaldi made no reply, and the Inquisitor, 
after a momentary silence, added, "Were 
you ever in the church of the Spirito Santo, 
at Naples?" 

•• Before I answer the question," said Vi- 
valdi, •• I require the name of my accuser." 

"You are to recollect that you have no 
right to demand anything in this place," 
observed the Inquisitor, "nor can you be 
ignorant that the name of the informer is 
always kept sacred from the knowledge of 
the accused. Who would venture to do his 
duty, if his name was arbitrarily to be ex- 
posed to the vengeance of the criminal against 
whom he informs ? It is only in a particular 
process that the accuser is brought forward." 

" The names of the witnesses ? " demanded 
Vivaldi. "The same justice conceals them 
also from the knowledge of the accused," re- 
plied the Inquisitor. 

" And is no justice left for the accused?" 
said Vivaldi. "Is he to be tried and con- 
demned without being confronted with either 
his prosecutor or the witnesses ? " 

" Yoiu- questions are too many," said the 
Inquisitor, " and your answers too few. The 
informer is not also the prosecutor ; the Holy 
Office, before which the information is laid, 
is the prosecutor and the dispenser of justice ; 
its public accuser lays the circumstances and 
the testimonies of the witnesses before the 
court. But too much of this." 

••How," exclaimed Vivaldi, "is the tri- 
bunal at once the prosecutor, witness, and 
judge? What can private mahce wish for 
more than such a court of justice^ at which 
to arraign its enemy ? The stiletto of the as- 
sassin is not so sure or so fatal to innocence. 
I now perceive that it avails me nothing to 
be guiltless ; a single enemy is sufficient to 
accomplish my destruction.'^ 

•• You have an enemy, then ? " observed the 
Inquisitor, 



Vivaldi was too well convinced that lie had 
one, but there was not sufficient proof as to 
the person of this enemy to justify him in 
asserting that it was Schedoni. The circum- 
stance of EUena having been arrested would 
have compelled him to suspect another per- 
son as being at least accessory to the designs 
of the confessor, had not credulity started in 
horror from the supposition that a mother's 
resentment could possibly betray her son into 
the prisons of the Inquisition, though this 
mother had exhibited a temper of remorse- 
less cnielty towards a stranger who had inter- 
rupted her views for that son. 

" You have an enemy, then," repeated the 
Inquisitor. 

"Tliat I am here sufficiently proves it," 
replied Vivaldi. "But I am so little any 
man's enemy, that I know not who to call 
mine." 

"It is evident, then, that you have no 
enemy," observed the subtle Inquisitor, "and 
that this accusation is brought against you 
by a respecter of truth and a faithful servant 
of the Roman interest." 

Vivaldi was shocked to perceive the in- 
sidious art by which be had been beti-ayed 
into a declaration apparently so harmless, 
and the cruel dextenty with which it had 
been turned against him. A lofty and con- 
temptuous silence was all that he opposed 
to the treachery of his examiner, on whose 
countenance appeared a smile of triumph and 
self-congratulation, the life of a fellow-crea- 
ture being, in his estimation, of no compara- 
tive importance with the self-applauses of 
successful art ; the art, too, upon which he 
most valued himself— that of his profession. 

The Inquisitor proceeded, "You persist, 
then, in withholding the truth?". He paused, 
but Vivaldi making no reply, he resiuncd. 

" Since it is evident, from your own decla- 
ration, that you have no enemy whom private 
resentment might have instigated to accuse 
you, and, from other circumstances which 
have occurred in your conduct that you are 
conscious of more than you have confessed, 
it appears that the accusation which has been 
urged against you is not a malicious slander. 
I exhort you, tnerefore, and once more con- 
jure you, by our holy faith, to make an in- 
genuous confession of your offences, and to 
save yourself from the means which must of 
necessity be enforced to obtain a confession 
before your trial commences. I adjure you, 
also, to consider that by such open conduct 
only can mercy be won to soften flie justice of 
this most righteous tribunal 1 " 

Vivaldi, perceiving that it was now necessary 
for him to reply, once more solemnly asserted 
his innocence of the crime alleged against 
him in the summons, and of the conscious- 
ness of any act which might lawfully sub- 
ject him to the notice of the Holy Office. 

The Inquisitor again demanded what wat 



THE ITALIAN. 



97 



the crime allej?ed, and Vivaldi having re< 
peated the accusation, he again bade the 
secretary note it ; as he did which, Vivaldi 
thought he perceived upon his features sonie- 
thio£f of a malignant satisfaction, for which 
he Jeneir not how to account. When the 
secretary had finished, Vivaldi was ordered 
to subKhbe his name and quality to the 
depositions, and he obeyed. 

The Inquisitor then bade him consider of 
the admonition he had received, and prepare 
dther to confess on the morrow or to under- 
go the question. As he concluded, he gave 
a signal, and the officer who had conducted 
VivaJdi in'.o the chamber immediately ap- 
peared. 

"You know yoiu" orders," said the In- 
quisitor; " receive your prisoner, and see that 
they are obeyed." 

I'he official bowed, and Vivaldi followed 
him from the i^iartmcnt in melancholy 
silence. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

T7LLBNA, meanwliile, when she had 
^^ been carried from the chapel of San 
Sebastian, was placed upon a horse in wait- 
ing, and. guarded by the two men who had 
seiztti her, commenced a journey which 
continued with litde intemiption during two 
nights and days. She had no means of 
Judging whither she was going, and listened 
in vain expectation for the feet of horses and 
the voice of \^vakli, who, she had been told, 
was following on the same road. 

The steps of travellers seldom broke upon 
the ^ence of these regions, and during the 
journey she was met only by some market- 
people passing to a neighbouring town, or 
now and then by the vine-dressers or 
kUx>arers in the ohve grounds; and she 
descended upon the vast plains of Apulia, 
stiil fgnorant of her situation. An encamp- 
ment, not of warriors, but of shepherds, 
who were lesuling their flocks to the moun- 
tains of Abruzzo, enlivened a small tract of 
these levels, which were shadowed on the 
north and east by the mountainous ridge, of 
the Garganus, stretching from theAppennine 
fax into the Adriatic. 

The appearance of the shepherds was 
neariy as wild and savage as that of the 
men who conducted Ellena ; but their pas- 
toral instruments of flageolets and tabors 
5poke of more civilised feelings, as they 
sounded sweetly over the desert. Her guards 
rested, and refreshed themselves with goat's 
milk, barley cakes, and almonds ; and the 
manners of these shepherds, like thobc she 
had formerly met with on the mountains, 
poved to be more hospitable than their air 
bad indicated. 

After Ellena had quitted this pastoral camp 
no v«6tige of a h«nuui rasidmc* appeared 



for several le.igiie?, except hnrc and there the 
towers of a decayed fortress perched uj)on 
the lofty acclivities she was approaching, and 
half concealed in the wcxxls. I'he evening 
of the second day was drawing on when her 
guards drew near the forest, which she had 
hmg obsepved in the distance, spreading 
over the many rising steeps of the Garganus. 
They entered by a track, a road it could not 
be called, which Ird among oaks and gigantic 
chestnuts, apparently the growth of centuries, 
and so thickly interwoven that their branches 
formed a canopy which seldom admitted the 
sky. The gloom which they threw around, 
and the thickets of cystus. juniper, and len- 
ticus which flourished txrnt'ath the shade, 
gave a character of feariul wildness to the 
scene. 

Having reached nn eminence where the 
trees were more thinly scattered, Ellena per- 
ceived the forests spreading on ail sides 
among hills and valleys, and descending to- 
wards the Adriatic, which bounded the 
distance in front. The coast, bending into li 
bay, was rocky and bold. I^fty pmnacles, 
wooded to their summits, rose over the 
shore), and cliffs of naked marble, of such 
gigantic proportions that they were awful 
even at a distance, obtruded themselves far 
into the waves, breasting their eternal fury. 
Beyond the margin of the coast, as far as 
the eye could reach, appeared pointed moun- 
tains, darkened with forests, rising lidge over 
ridge in many successions. Ellena. as she 
surveyed this wild scenery, felt as if she was 
going into eternal banishment from society. 
She was tranquil, but it was with the quiet- 
ness of exhausted grief, not of resignation ; 
and she looked back upon the past, and 
awaited the future, with a kind of out- 
breathed despair. 

She had travelled for some miles through 
the forest, her guards only now and thtu 
uttering to each other a question, or an ob- 
servation concerning the changes which had 
taken place in the bordering scenery sincr 
they last passed it, when night began to close 
in upon them. 

Ellena perceived her approach to the sea 
only by the murmurs of its surge upon the 
rocky coast, till, having reached an eminence 
which was, however, no more than the base 
of two woody moimtains that towered closely 
over it, she saw dimly its grey surface spread- 
ing in the bay below. She now ventured to 
ask how much further she was to ^o^ and 
whether she was to be taken on board one of 
the little vessels, apparently fishing-bmacks, 
that she could just discern at anchor. 

" You have not far to go now," replied one 
of the guards, surlily; "you will soon beat 
the end of your journey, and at rest" 
■ They descended to the shore, and ^^tcsatv^^^ 
came to a lonely dweWVng, yiYAOcv s^oqA. ^atv^mx 
the margin of &« sea a% «^mosx \.o \>« HiwdaA 



98 THE ITAUAN. 

by the waves. No light appeared at any of or three broken chain and a table. He eyed 

the lattices ; and, from the silence that reigned EUsna with a shrewd contraeted brow, and 

within, it seemed to be uninhabited. The then looked significandy at tiie guard, but 

rrd had probably reason to know otherwise, was silent, till he desired them all to sit down, 

they halted at the door and shouted with adding that he would dress some fish for 

all their strength. No voice, however, an- supper. Ellena discovered that this mil 

swered to their call, and while they persevered was the master of the place ; it appeared also 

in efforts to rouse the inhabitants, Ellena that he was the only inhabitant ; and when 

anxiously examined the building as exactly the guard soon after informed her their 

as the twilight would permit, ft was of an journey concluded here, her wont appre- 

ancient and peculiar structure, and, though hensions were confirmed. The efforts she 

scarcely important enough for a mansion, had made to sustain bar spirits were no longer 

evidently never been designed for the residence successful. It seemed that she was brought 

of peasants. hither by ruffians to a lonely house on the 

The walls, of unhewn marble, were high, sea-shore, inhabited by a man who had 
and strengthened by bastions ; and the edifice " villain " engraved in everv line of his face, 
had tuiretted comers, which, with the porch to be the victim of inexorable pride and an 
in front, and the sloping roof, were mlling insatiable desire of revenge. After considerinff 
fast into numerous symptoms of decay. The these circumstances, and the words whidi had 
whole building, with its dark windows and just told her she was to go no further, con- 
soundless avenues, had an air strikingly for- viction struck like lightning upon her heart ; 
lorn and solitary. A high wall surrounded and, believing she was brought hither to be 
the small court in which it stood, and pro- assassinated. norrcMr chilled Jj her fratni>^ aii^i 
bably had once served as a defence to the her senses forsook her. 
dwelling ; but the gates, which should have Onrecovering. she found herself surrounded 
closed against intruders, could no longer per- by the guard and the stranger, and she would 
form their office ; one of the folds had drop- have supplicated for their pity but thai she 
ped from its fastenings, and lav on the ground feared to exasperate them uf betraying her 
almost concealed in a deep bed of weeds, and suspicions. She complained of fiuigue, and 
the other creaked on its hinges to every blast, requested to ht shown to her room. The 
at each swing seeming ready to follow the fate men looked upon one another, hesitated, and 
of its companion. then asked her to partake of the fish that was 

The repeated calls of (he guard were at preparing. But Ellena having declined the 

length answered by a rough voice from with- invitation with as good a grace as she could 

in, when the door of the porch was lazily assume, they consented that she should with- 

unbarred and opened bv a man whose visage draw. Spalatro, taking the lanap, Ughted 

was so misery-struck that Ellena could not her across the hall to the corridor above ; 

look upon it with indifference, though wrapped where he opened the door of a chamber, in 

in misery of her own. The lamp he held which he sidd ^e was to sleep. 

threw a gleam athwart it, and showed the "Where is my bed?" said the afflicted 

gaunt ferocity of famine, to which the shadow Ellena, fearfully, as she looked round, 

of his hollow eyes added a terrific vnldness. *' It is there—on the floor," replied Spalatro, 

Ellena shrunk while she gazed. She had pointing to a miserable mattress, over which 

never before seen villainy and suffering so hung the tattered curtains of what had once 

strongly pictured on the same face, and she been a canopy. '*If you want the lamp," 

observed hira with a degree of thrilling curi- he added, "I will leave it, and come for it 

osity which for a moment excluded from her in a minute or two." 

mind all consciousness of the evils to be " Will you not let me have a lamp for the 

apprehended from him. night ? " she said, in a supplicating and timid 

It was evident that this house had not been voice, 

built for his reception ; and she conjectured " For the night !" said the man, gniflly. 

that he was the servant of some cruel agent «• What I to set fire to the house." 

of the Marchesa di Vivaldi. Ellena still entreated that he would allow 

From the porch she followed into an old her the comfort of a light, 

hall, ruinous, and destitute of any kind of *'Ay, ay," replied Spalatro, with a look she 

furniture. It was not extensive, but lofty, for could not comprehend, " it would be a great 

it seemed to ascend to the roof of the edifice, comfort to you, truly I You do not know 

and the chambers above opened around it what you ask." 

Into a corridor. •* What is it that you mean ? " said Ellena, 

:>ome half-sullen salutations were exchanged eagerly. *• I conjure you, in the name <rf oar 

between the guard and the stranger, whom holy church, to tell me I 

thqr called Spalatro, as they pas^ into a Spalatro stepped suddenly back and looked 

cifambcr where it appeared that he had upon her with surprise, but without soeak- 

ffCD sleeping on a, mattress laid in a comer, tog. ^^ 

MU tbe otber funitmeoiiht place weretwo •*HaY*m«cjoiixi«V* «i2i«\'«awa^^cwa!^ 



V 



THM ITAUAN. 99 



•Uurmed by his maimer ; *' I am friendless, convent with much less trouble ; and still 

and wiUioat help 1 " more so, when Ellena considered the cha- 

" What do Toa fear," said the man, re- racter of the Marcliesa, such as she had 

covering UmsraT ; and then, without waiting already experienced it. The appearance of 

her rep^, added, "Is it such an unmercifid this house, and of the man who inhabited it, 

deed to take away a lamp ? " with the circumstance of no woman bein? 

EUena, who again feared to betray the found residing here, each and all these signified 

ettent of her suspicions, only replied that it that she was brought hither, not for long im> 

would be merciful to leave it, for thai her prisonment, but for death. Her utmost 

Spiiits were low, and she required light to efforts for fortitude or resignation could not 

cheer them in a new abode. overcome the cold tremblings, the sickness of 



"We do not stand upon such conceits heart, the faintness and universal horror that 
here,'* replied l^ialatro; "we have other assailed her. How often, with tears of mingled 
matters to mind. Besides, it's the only lamp terror and grief, did she csUl upon Vivaldi^ 
in the house, and the eompany below are in Vivaldi, alas 1 far distant— to save her : how 
daiinaees wfafle I am losing time here. I will often escdaim in agony that she should never, 
leave it for two minutes, and no more." never see him more 1 
Ellena made a sign for him to put down the She was spared, however, the horror of 
lamp ; and. when he left the room, she heard believing that he was an inhabitant of the In- 
the door barred upon her. quidtion. Having detected the imposition 

She employed these two minutes in ex- which had been practised towards herself, and 
smining the chamber, and the possibility it that she was neither on the wayto the Holy 
might aflford of an escape. It was a large Office nor conducted by persons belonging to 
apartment, unfurnished, and unswept of the it, she concluded that the whole afbir ofvi- 
oobwrtM of many years. The only door she valdi's arrest had been planned by the Mar- 
discovered was the one by which she had chesa merely as a pretence for confining him 
entered, and the only vdndow a lattice, which till she shotild be placed beyond the reach of 
was grated. Such preparation for preventing his assistance. She hoped, therefore, that he 
escape seemed to hint how much there might had only t)een sent to some private residence 
be to escape from. belonging to his family, and that, when her 

Having examined the chamber, without fate was decided, he would be released, and 
finding a single circumstance to encourage she be the only victim. This was the sole 
hope, tried tne strength of the bars, which consideration that afforded any degree of 
she could not shake, and sought in vain for assuagement to her sufferings, 
an inside listening for her door, she placed llie people below sat till a late hoiu:. She 
the lamp beside it, and awaited the return of listened often to their distant voices, as they 
Spalatro. In a few moments he came, and were distinguishable in the pauses of the surge 
offieied her a cup of sour wine with a slice of that broke loud and hollow on the shore ; and 
faiead, wliidi,b&ig somewhat soothed by this every time the creaking hinges of their room 
attention, she ^d not think proper to reject, door moved, apprehended tney were coming 

Spalatro then quitted the room, and the to her. At length it appeared they had left 
door was again barred. Ldft once more alone, the apartment, or had fallen asleep there, for 
she tried to overcome apprehension by prayer; a profound stillness reigned whenever the 
and after offering up her vespers with a fer- murmur of the waves sank. Doubt did not 
vent heart, she became more confiding and long deceive her, for, while she yet listened, 
composed. she distinguished footsteps ascending to the 

But it was impossible that she could so far corridor. She heard them approach her 
forget the dapgeis of her situation as to seek chamber, and stop at the door ; she heard, 
ileep, however wearied she might be, while also, the low whisperings of their voices, as 
the door of her room remained unseciured the^ seemed consulting what was to be done, 
against the intrusion of the ruffians below ; and she scarcely ventured to draw breath, 
and, as she had no means of fastening it, she while she intensely attended to them. Not a 
determined to watch during the whole night, word, however, distinctly reached her, till, as 
Thus left to solitude and darkness, she seated one of them was departing, another called 
herself upon the mattress to await the return out in a half-whisper, " It is below on the 
of nocnrning, and was soon lost in sad reflec- table, in my girdle ; make haste." The man 
tion. Evenr minute occurrence of the past came back, and said something in a lower 
day, and of the conduct of her guards, moved voice, to which the other replied, "She sleeps," 
in review before her judgment ; and com- or Ellena was deceived hy the hissing con- 
bfaiing these wifh the circumstances of her sonants of some other words. He then de- 
present sitimtion, scarcely a doubt as to the scended the stairs ; and in a few minutes she 
&ite dfgfgnfd for her remained. It seemed perceived his comrade also pass away from 
highly improbi^ that the Marchesa di Vi- the door ; she listened to hia xe.\x«a.\XTi^ ^<(^ 
iStdi had sent her hither merely for \mpm<m- till the roaring of the sea ^qa iXoiiCA Vi^^asd^^n. 
aientj sinco die v^ht bsive con&ied her in a their stead. 



SCO THE ITALIAN. 

Ellena^s terrors were relieved only for a Reassured by the light that now i;>enraded 

moment. Considering the import of the ho* room, she returned to the mattress, whers 

words, it appeared that the man who had anxiety at length yielded to her wrariiWM^ 

descended was gone for the stiletto of the and she obtained a short repose, 

other, such an instrument being usually worn .»«.«. 

in the girdle ; and, from the assurance "she r^rr a o-rwo vtv 

sleeps," beseemed to fear that his words had CHAPTER XIX. 

been overheard ; and she listened again for T7 LLENA was awakened from prolbtuid 

their steps, but they came no more. -'-^ sleep by a loud noise at the door of her 

Happily for Ellena's peace, she knew not chamber ; when, starting from her mattress, 

that her chamber had a door, so contrived she looked around her with surprise and dis- 

as to open without sound, by which assassins may as imperfect recollections of the past 

might enter unsuspcctedly at any hour of the began to gather on her mind. She distin- 

night. Believing that the inhabitants of this guished the undrawing of iron bars, and then 

house had now retired to rest, her hopes and the countenance of Spalatro at her door, be- 

her spirits began to revive ; but she was yet fore she had a clear remembrance of bier 

sleepless and watchful She measured the situation — that she was a prisoner in a bouse. 

chamber with imequal steps, often starling as on a lonely shore, and that this man was lier- 

the old boards shook and groaned where she gaoler. Such sickness of Uie heart letumed 

passed ; and Aften pausing to listen whether with these convictions, such faintness and 

all was yet still in the corridor. The gleam terror, that, unable to support her trembling 

which a rising moon threw between the bars frame, she sank again upon the mattress 

of her window now began to show many without demanding the reason of this abnipt 

shadowy objects in the chamber, which she intrusion. 

did not recollect to have observed while the "I have brought you some breakfast, "sai^ 

lamp was there. More than once she fancied Spalatro, " if you are awake to take it ; but 

she saw something glide along towards the you seem to be asleep yet. Surely you have 

place where the mattress was laid, and, had sleep sufficient for one night ; you went 

almost congealed with terror, she stood still to rest soon enough." 

to watch it ; but the illusion, if such it was, EUena made no reply, but, deeply affected ■ 
disappeared where the moonlight faded, and with a sense of her situation, looked with be- 
even her fears could not give shape to it be- seeching eyes at the man, who advanced 
yond. Had she not known that her chamber holding forth an oaten oUce and a basin of 
door remained strongly barred, she would milk. "Where shall I set them," said he ; 
have believed this was an assassin stealing to "you must needs be glad of them since you 
thebed where it might be supposed she slept, had no supper." 

Even now the thought occurred to her, and. Ellena thanked him, and de^ed he would 
va^e as it was, had power to strike an an- place them on the floor, for there was neither 
gmsh almost deadly through her heart, while table nor chair in the room. As he did this, 
she considered that her immediate situation she was strudc with the expression of his 
was nearly as perilous as the one she had countenance, which exhibited a strange mix- 
imaged. Again she listened, and scarcely ture of archness and malignity. He seemed 
dared to breathe, but not the lightest sound congratulating himself upon his ingenuity, 
occurred in the pauses of the waves, and she and anticipating some occasion of tnumph ; 
believed herself convinced that no person ex- and she was so much interested that her ob- 
cept herself was in the room. That she was servation never quitted him while he remained 
deceived in this belief, appeared from her in the room. As his eyes acddentallv met 
unwillingness to approach the mattress while hers he turned them away with the abrupt- 
it was yet involved in shade. Unable to over- ntss of a person who is conscious of evil in> 
come her reluctance, she took her station at tentions, and fears lest they should be de- 
the window till the strengthening rays should tected, nor once looked up till he was hastily 
allow a clearer view of the chamber, and in quitting the chamber, and j^e then heard 
some degree restore her confidence ; and she the door secured as formerly, 
watched the scene without as it gradually be- The impression whid^ his look had left on 
came visible. The moon, rising over the her mind so wholly engaged her in conjecture 
ocean, showed its restless surface spreading to that a considen^ble time elaj^ed before she 
the wide horizon ; and the waves, which broke remembered that he had brought the refresh- 
in foam upon the rocky beach below, retiring ment she so much required ; but, as she now 
in long white lines far upon the waters. She lifted it to her lips, a horrible suspicion ar« 
listened to their measured and solemn sound, rested her hand ; it was not. however, before 
and, somewhat soothed by the solitary gran- she had swallowed a small quandty of the 
dear of the view, remained at the laldce till milk. The look of Spalatro, which had ooca- 
themoon had risen high into the heavens; sioned her surprise, had accompanied the 
Mcf even till the morning began to dawn upon setting dovm ol Vhabtutiftlttaxx ^iulllQciiurred 
too sea, and purple tbw tastvu otoudst to b«c OuA ipQlkMi&ti«a\a£<»i«dk W ^Dtt\»^^ 



THE ITALIAN. 



lot 



Sbe was thus eoittpelled to refuse the susten- 
ance which was beoome necessary to her, for 
she feared to taste even of the oaten aUce, 
since Spahtro had offered it ; bat the little 
milk ane luid unwarily taken was so very 
small that she had no apprehension con- 
cerning it. 

The day, however, was passed in terror, 
and almost in despondency. She could neither 
doubt the purpose for which she had been 
brooght hither nor discover any possibiliiy of 
escaping from her persecutors ; yet that pro- 
pensity to hope, which buoys up the human 
heart even in the severest moments of trial, 
sastidned, in some d^^ree, her fainting spirits. 

During these mismble hours of solitude 
and suspense, the only alleviation to her 
snflferine arose from a belief that Vivaldi was 
safe at least from danger though not from 
grief ; hot she now understood too much of 
the de xt e rou s contrivances of the Marchesa, 
his mother, to think it was practicable for him 
to escape from her designs and again restore 
her to liberty. 

AU day EUena either leaned against the 
bais of her window, lost in reverie, while her 
nnooDsdous eyes were fixed upon the ocean, 
whose murmurs she no longer heard, or she 
listened for some sound from within the 
house that might assist her conjectures as to 
the number of persons below, or what might 
be passing there. The house, however, was 
profoundly still, except when now and then a 
wotttep sauntered along a distant passage, 
or a door was heard to dose ; but not the 
hum of a single voice was heard from the 
knver rooms, nor any symptom of there being 
more than one person beside herself in the 
dweDing. Though she had not heard her 
fonner gnards depart, it appeared certain 
that thry were gone and that she was left 
alone in this place with Spalatro. What 
could be the purport of such a proceeding 
Blena could not imagine ; if her death was 
^signed, it seemed strange that one person 
only should be left to the hazard of the deed, 
when three must have rendered the comple- 
tion of it certain. But this surprise vanished 
wtwn her suspicion of poison returned, for it 
was probable that these men had believed 
their scheme to be already nearly accom- 
plished, and had abandoned her to die alone 
m a chamber from whence escape was im- 
practicable, leaving Spalatro to dispose of her 
remains. All the incongruities she had sepa- 
rately observed in their conduct seemed now 
to harmonize and unite in one plan ; and her 
death, designed by poison, and that poison 
to be conveyed in the disguise of nourish- 
ment, appeared to have been the object of it. 
Whether it was that the strength of this con- 
viction affected her fancy or that the cause 
was real, Ellena, remembering at this mo- 
ment that she had tasted the mUk, was seized 
wiib M tuUrtiMU ibuddering, and thought 



she felt that the poi.<K>n had been sufficiently 
potent to affect her, even in the inconsider- 
able quantity she might have taken. 

While she was thus agitated she distin- 
guished footsteps loitering near her door, and, 
attentively listening, be^roe convinced that 
some person was in the corridoi. The steps 
Dooved- softly, sometimes stopping for an in- 
stant as if to allow time for listening, and 
soon after passed away. 

*'It is Spalat^pl" said Ellena; *'he be- 
lieves that I have taken the poison, and he 
comes to listen for my dying groans ! Alas I 
he is only come somewhat too soon, per- 
haps ! " 

As this horrible supposition occurred, the 
shuddering returned with increased violence, 
and she sank, almost fainting, on the mat- 
tress ; but the fit was not of long continu- 
ance. When it gradually left her and recol- 
lection revived, she perceived, however, the 
prudence of suffering Spalatro to nippose 
she had ta)cen the liquid he brought her, 
since such*belief would at least prociure seme 
delay of further schemes, and every delay 
afforded some possibility for hope to rest 
upon. Ellena therefore poured through the 
bars of her window the milk which she be- 
lieved Spalatro had designed should be fatal 
in its consequence. 

It was evening when she again fancied 
footsteps were lingering near her door, and 
the suspicion was confirmed when, on turn- 
ing her eyes, she perceived a shade on the 
floor underneath it as of some person sta- 
tioned without. Presently the shadow glided 
away, and at the same time she distinguished 
departing steps treading cautiously. 

"It is hel" said EUena; " he stiU lUteos 
for my moans ! " 

This further confirmation of his designs 
affected her nearly as much as the first ; 
when, anxiously turning her looks towards 
the corridor, the shadow again appeared be- 
neath the door, but she heard no step. El- 
lena watched it with intense solicitude and 
expectation ; fearing every instant that 
Spalatro would conclude her doubts by 
entering the room. "And ohl when he 
discovers that I live," thought she, "what 
may I not expect diuing the first moments of 
his disappointment 1 What less than imme- 
diate death 1 " 

The shadow, after remaining a few minutes 
stationary, moved a little, and then glided 
away as before. But it quickly returned, 
and a low sound followed, as of some person 
endeavouring to unfasten bolts without noise. 
Ellena heard one bar gently undnrtn, and 
then another ; she observed the door begin 
to move, and then to give way, till it gradu- 
ally unclosed, and the face of S^a.\aAxc^ \it^- 
sented itself frombtYiVaiVx.. V^\vckOVi\\TKa\»- 
diately entering, \vt \\vTtw %. ^-wifetovMA^^ 
6h«mber, aa U he Y(Vi:tx^ Nft ws»N»^^ ^"««*^ 



102 THE ITALIAN, 

circumstance before he ventured further. His as the boats approached the shore, they weTd 
look was more than usually haggard as it too far off to allow the figures of the men to 
rested upon Ellena, who apparently reposed appear. To EUena, who had believed that 
on her mattress. no human habitation, except her prison, inter- 

H.iving gazed at her for an instant, he rupted the vast solitudes of ^hese forests and 
ventured towards the bed with quick and shores, the view of the huts, remote as they 
unequal steps ; his countencince expressed at were, imparted a feeble hope, and even some* 
once im, atience, alarm, and the conscious- what ot joy. She looked back to observe 
w ss of guilt. When he was within a few whether Spalatro was near ; he was already 
paces Ellena raised herself, and he started withm a few paces ; and, casting a wistfiu 
back as if a sudden spectre had crossed him. glance forward to the remote cottages, her 
The more than usual wildness and wanness heart sunk again. 

of his looks, with the whole of his conduct, It was a lowering evening, and the sea was 
seemed to confirm all her former terror ; and dark and swelling ; the screaais of Uie scAf- 
when he roughly asked her how she did, birds too, as they wheeled among the cloudy 
Eliina had not sufficient presence of mind and sought their high nests in the rocka. 
to answer that she was ill. For some mo- seemed to indicate an approaching stona. 
mems he regarded her with an earnest and Ellena was not so wholly engaged by selfish 
sullen attention, and then a sly glance of sufferings but that she could sympathise with 
scrutiny which he threw round the chamber those of others, and she rejoiced that the 
told her that he was inquiring whether she fishermen, whose boats she had observed, had 
had taken the poison. On perceiving that escaped the threatening tempest and were 
the ba<>in was empty, he lifted it from the safely sheltered in their little homes, wher^ 
floor, and Ellena fancied a gleam of satisfac- as they heard the loud waves break along the 
tion passed over his visage. coast, they could look with keener pleasure 

" You have had no dinner," said he, " I upon the social circle and the warm comforts 
forgot you ; but supper will soon be ready, around them. From such considerations, 
and you may walk upon the beach till then, however, she returned again to a sense of her 
if you will." own forlorn and friendless situation. 

Ellena, extremely surprised and perplexed "Alas ! " said she, "I have no longer a 
by this ciffer of a seemint{ indulgence, knt-w home, a circle to smile welcomes upon me 1 
not whether to accept or reject it. She sus- I have no longer even one fiiend to support, 
pected that some treachery lurked within it. to rc-scue me ! I — a miserable wanderer on a 
The invitaiion appeared to be only a strata- distant shore ! tracked, perhaps, by the foot- 
gem to lure her to destruction, and she de- steps of the assasssin. who at this instant eyes 
termined to decline accepting it ; when again his victim with silent watchfulness, and awaits 
she considered that, to accomplish this, it the moment of opportunity to sacrifice her 1 " 
was not ne.essar) to withdraw her from the Elkna shuddered as she said this, and 
chamber, where she was already sufficiently tiurned aga n to observe whether Spalatro was 
in the power of her persecutors. Her situa- near. He was not within view ; and while 
tion could not be more desperate than it was she wondered, and congratulated herself on a 
at present, and almost any change mi^jlit p )ssibility of escaping, she perceived a monk 
make >t less so. walking silently beneath the dark rocks that 

As she descended from the corridor, and overbrowed the beach. His black garments 
pass("d through the lower part of the house, were folded round him ; his face was inclined 
no person appeared but her conductor ; and towards the ground, and he had the air of a 
she ventured to inquire whether the men who man in deep meditation, 
had brought her hither were departed. Spa- "His, no doubt, are worthy musings 1'* 
latro did not return an answer, but led the said Ellena, as she observed him with mingled 
way in silence to the court, and. having hope and surprise. "I may address myself^ 
passed the gates, he pointed toward the west, without fear, to one of his order. It is probably 
and said she might walk that way, as much his wish, as it is his duty, to succour 

Ellena bent her course towards the " many the unfortunate. Who could have hoped to 
sounding waves. " followed at a short distance find on this sequestered shore so sacred a pro- 
by Spalatro, and, wrajt in thought, pursued lector I his convent cannot be far off." 
the windings of the shore, scarcely noticing He approached, his face still bent towards 
the objects around her ; till, on ]jassing the the ground, and Ellena advanced slowly, and 
foot of a rock, siie hfied hi r eyes to the scene with trembling steps, to meet him. Ashe drew 
that unfolded beyond, an 1 observed some near, he viewed her askance, without lifting 
huts scattered at a considerable distance, his head ; but she perceived bis large eyes 
apparently the residence of fishermen. She looking from under the shade of his cowl, and 
could just distinguish the dark sails of some the upper part of his peculiar countenance, 
skiffs turning the cliffs, and entering the Her confidence in his protection began to fail, 
little bay, where the hamlet margined the and she faltered, imable to speak, and scarcely 
bench ; but, though she saw the sails lowered daring to meet his eyes. The monk stalked 



THE ITALIAN, 



103 



past her in sflenoe, the lower part of his visage 
still mtiffled in his drapery, and as he passed 
her looked neither with curiosity nor surprise. 

Ellena paused, and determined, when he 
should be at some distance, to endeavour to 
make her way to the hamlet and throw her- 
self upon the humanity of its inhabitants, 
rather than solicit the pity of this forbidding 
stranger. But in the next mom* nt she heard 
a step brhind her. and, on turnin^^, saw the 
monk again approaching. He stalked by 
as before, surveying her, howevt-r, with a sly 
and scrutiDlsing glance from the corners of 
his eyes. His air and countenance were 
equally repulsive, and still Ellena could not 
summon courage enough to attempt engag- 
ing his compa^on, but shrank as from an 
enemy. There was something also terrific 
in the silent stalk of so gigantic a form ; it 
announced both power and treachery He 
passed dowly on to some distance, and dis- 
app^red among the rocks. 

Ellena turned once more with^an intention 
of hastening towards the distant hamlet, 
before Spalatro should observe her, whote 
strange absoice she had scarcely time to won- 
der at ; but ^e had not proceeded far, when 
suddenly sbe perceived the monk again at her 
shoulder. She started, and almost shrieked 
whUe he re^^arded her with more attention than 
before. He paused a moment, and seemed 
to hesitate ; after which he again passed on 
in silence. The distress of Ellena incn ased ; 
he was gone the way she had designed to run, 
and she feared almost equally to follow him, 
and to return to her prison. Presently he 
turned, and passed her again, and Ellena 
hastened forward. But when, fearful of 
being pursued, she again looked back, she 
observed him conversing with Spalatro. 
They appeared to be in consultation while 
they slowfy advanced, till, probably observing 
her rapid progress, Spalatro called on her to 
stop, in a voice that echoed among all the 
rocks. It was a voice which would not be 
disobeyed. She looked hopelessly at the 
still distant cottages, and slackened her steps. 
Presently the monk again passed before her, 
and Spalatro had again disappeared. The 
frown with which the former now regarded El- 
lena was so terrific, that she shrank trembling 
back, though she knew him not for her per- 
se nitor. since she had never consciously seen 
Schedool. He was agitated, and his look 
became darker. 

••Whither go you?" said he in a voice 
that was stifled by emotion. 

'• Who is it, father thatasks the question?" 
said Ellena,endeavouring to appear composed. 

•• WW 'her go you, and who are you ? " re- 
peat«Hl the monk more sternly. 

** T am in unhappy or ( I han." replied Ellena, 
sighing deeply ; •' if you are, as your habit 
denotes^ a fxiend to the chanties, you will 
regpudmc with compassioD. " 



Schedoni was silent, and then &i{d, " Who 
and what is it that you feir ? " 

•• I fear — even for my life," replied Ellena, 
with hesitat ion. She observed a darker shade 
pass over his countenance. 

" For your life I " said he, with ^parent 
surpris*^- ; " who is there that would think It 
worth the taking?" 

Ellena was struck with these words. 

••Poor insect!" added Schedoni, "who 
would crush thee ? " 

Ellena made no reply ; she remained wi'h 
her eyes fixed in amazrmmt ui)on his f^ice. 
There was something in his manner of pro- 
nouncing this yet more pxtraonlin-iry than in 
the words themselves. AlirmiKi by his m m- 
U'T, and aw«d by the incrca^in;.: glouni, and 
swelling surge, that brokf? in thunder on the 
beach, bhe at length turned away, and again 
walked towards the hamlet, which was yet 
very remote. 

He soon overtook her, when, rudely seizing 
her arm, and gazing earnestly on her face, 
•• Who is it that you fear? " said he ; "say, 
who?" 

"That is more than I dare say," replied 
Ellena, scarcely able to sustain hersHf. 

"Hah I is it even so ! " siid the monk with 
increasing emotion. His visage now became 
so terrible that Ellena struggled to liberate 
her arm, and supplicated that he would not 
detain her. He w.ls sil« nt, and still gazed 
upon her, but his eyes, when she had ceased 
to struggle, assumed the fixed and vacant 
glare of a man whose thoughts have retired 
within themselves, and who is no longer con« 
scious to surrounding objects. 

" I beseech you to release me I " repeated 
Ellena; "it is late, and I am Cur from 
home." 

"That is true," muttered Schedoni, still 
grasping her arm, and seeming to reply to bis 
own thoughts rather than to her words—' ' that 
is venr true." 

"The evening is closing fast," continued 
Ellena, "and 1 shall be overtaken by the 
storm." 

Schedoni still mused, and then muttered — 
"The storm, say you? Why, aye, let it come." 

As he spoke he suffered her arm to drop, 
but still held it, and walked slowly towards 
the house. Ellena. thus compelled toaccom- 

f)any him, and yet more alarmed both by his 
ooks, his incoherent answers, and his ap- 
proach to her prison, renewed her supplica- 
tions and her efforts for libeny in a voice of 
piercing distress, adding, " I am far from 
home, father ; mght is coming on. Sr:e how 
the rocks darken ! I am far from hjme, and 
shall be* waited for." 

" That is filse !" said Schedoni. with em- 
pha-;is : * ^ind you ^ now K V.o b^ «»o." 

" Alas I I do," TepW«^ ^Wtxv..^, ^\X.\v vwixv^eA. 
shame and Kllef. * ' lYvaN^ x^o ld^tAsXQ"«'«2w^ 
for me ! " 



Z04 



THE ITALIAN. 



'* What do those deserve who delibsrately 
utter falsehoods/' contiDued the monk, "who 
deceive, and flatter young men to their de- 
struction ? " 

" Father 1 " exclaimed the astonished El- 
lena. 

" Who disturb the peace of &milies — 
who trepan, with wanton arts, the heirs of 
noble houses — ^who — bah ! what do such de- 
serve ? " 

Overcome with astonishment and terror, 
EUena remained silent. She now understood 
that Scbedoni, so far from being likely to 
prove a protector, was an agent of her worst, 
and, as she had believed, her only enemy ; 
and an apprehension of the immediate and 
tenibie vengeance which such an agent 
seemed willing to accomplish subdued her 
senses ; she tottered, and sank upon the 
beach. The weight which strained the arm 
Schedoni held, called his attention to her 
situation. 

As he gazed upon her helpless and faded 
form he l^came agitated. He quitted it, and 
traversed the beac^ in short turns and with 
hasty steps ; came back again, and bent over 
it — his heart seemed sensible to some touch 
of pity. At one moment he stepped towards 
the sea, and taking water in the hollows of 
his hands, threw it upon her face ; at another, 
seeming to regret that he had done so, he 
would stamp with sudden fury upon the shore, 
and walk abruptly to a distance. The conflict 
between his design and his conscience was 
strong, or, perhaps, it was only between his 
passions. He who had hitherto been insen- 
sible to every tender feeling, who, governed 
by ambition and resentment, had contributed, 
by his artful instigations, to fix the baleful 
resolution of the Marchesa di Vivaldi, and 
who was come to execute her purpose — even 
he could not now look upon the innocent, 
the wretched Ellena, without yielding to the 
momentary weakness, as he termed it, of 
compassion. 

While he was yet unable to bafiSe the new 
emotion by evil passions, he despised that 
which conquered him. " And shall the weak- 
ness of a fjirl," said he, " subdue the resolu- 
tion of a man ? Shall the view of her transi- 
ent sufferings unnerve my firm heart, and 
compel me to renounce the lofty plans I have 
so arHenily, so laboriously imagined, at the 
very instant when they are changing into 
realities ? Am I awake ? Is one spark of the 
fire whii h has so long smouldered within my 
bosom, and consumed my peace, alive? Or 
am I tame and abject as my fortimes ? hah I as 
my fortunes I Shall the spirit of my family 
yield for ever to circumstances ? The question 
rouses it, and I feel its energy revive withiii 
me." 

He stalked with hasty steps towards Ellena, 
as if he feared to trust his resolution with a 
tecoDd pause. He had a dagger concealed 



beneath his monk'i habit ; as he had also an 
assassin's heart shrouded by his garments. 
He had a dafixer — but he hesitated to use it ;. 
the blood w^h it might spill would be ob- 
served by the peasants of the neighhonring 
hamlet, and might lead to a discovery. It 
would be safer, he considered, and easier, to 
lay EUena, senseless as she was, in the waves s 
their coldness would recal her to life only at 
the moment before they would suffocate Mr. 
As he stooped to lift her, his resolution 
faltered again on beholding her innocent 
face, and in that moment she moved. He 
started back, as if she could have known hit 
purpose, and, knowing it, could have avenged 
herself. The water which he had thrown npoii 
her face had gradually revived her ; she 
unclosed her eyes, and, on peroeivins hira« 
shrieked and attempted to rise. His roKdn- 
tion was sukxiued, so tremblingly feariui fa 
guilt in the moment when it would eaecute its 
atrocities. Overcome with apprehensions, yet 
agitated with shame and indignation agamst 
himself for being so, he gased at her tat an 
instant in silence, and then abrnptly tmnd 
away his eye^ and left her. EUena listaneit 
to his departing steps, and, rai^ig beraeU; 
observed nun retiring among the rodis that 
led towards the house. Astonished at Us 
conduct, and surprised to find that she was 
alone, EUena renewed all her effiMts to aoitain 
herself till she should reach tlie iiamlet ao 
long the object of her hopes ; bat she had 
proceeded only a few paces, when Spalatio 
again appeared swifdy approaching. Her 
utmost exertion avaUed her nothing; her 
feeble steps were soon overtaken, and EOeoa 
perceived herself again his prisoner. The 
look with which she resigned herself awakened 
no pity in Spalatro, who uttered some taunting 
jest upon the swiftness of her flight as he lea 
her back to her prison and proceeded in sullen 
watchfulness. Once again, then, she entered 
the gloomy waUs of that fatal mansion, never 
more, she now believed, to quit them with 
life, a belief which was strengthened iriwn 
she remembered that the monk, on leaving 
her, had taken the way hither ; for, thon^ 
she knew not how to accotmt for his late fiis- 
bearance, she could not siippose that he 
would long be merciful. He appeared no 
more, however, as she passed to her chamber, 
where Spalatro left her again to solitude and 
terror, and she heard that fateful door again 
barred upon her. When his retreating steps 
had ceased to sound, a stiUnebS as of the 
grave prevailed in the house, like the dead 
calm which sometimes precedes the borrors 
of a tempest. 

CHAPTER XX. 

SCHEDONI had returned from the beadi a 
to the house in a state of perturbalfcAB 
that defied the control of even his OWn stcm^ 



THB ITALIAN. 105 

WilL On tht way thither he met Spalatip, reflect. He perceived, too late for his 

whom, as he deq>atdied him to Ellena, he advantage, that it was necessary for him to 

stricdjr oommaaded not to approach his dispose of part of his estate and to confine 

chamber till he should be summoned. himself to the income of the remainder. 

Having roached his apartment, he secured Incapable of submitting with grace to the 
the door, though not any person except him- reduction which his folly had rendered 
sdf was in the bouse, nor anvone expected expedient, he endeavoured to obtain by cun- 
but thoae whom he knew would not dare to ning the luxuries that his prudence had 
intrude upon him. Had it been possible to failed to keep, and which neither his genius 
have shut out all consciousness of himself, nor his integrity could command. He with- 
also, how willingly would he have done so I drew, however, from the eyes of his neigh- 
He threw himsdf^into a chair, and remained hours, unwilling to submit his altered circum- 
for a considerable time motionless and lost stances to their observation, 
in thought, yet the emotions of his mind Concerning several years of his life, from 
were yiolent and contradictory. At the verv this period, nothing was generally known ; 
instant when his heart reproached him with and when he was next discovered, it was in 
the crime he had meditat^l, he regpretted the the Spirito Santo convent at Naples, in the 
ambitioas views he must relinquish if he habit of a monk, and under the assumed 
fidled to pemtrate it, and regarded himself name of Schedoni. His air and countenance 
with some degree of contempt for having were as much altered as his way of life ; his 
hitherto hesitated on the subject. He con- looks had become gloomy and severe, and the 
lidered the cha ra cter of. his own mind with pride which had mingled with the gaiety of 
aaundshment, for dicumstances had drawn theirformer expression occasionally discovered 
forth tndts, of which, till now, he had no itself under the disguise of humility, but more 
wspickm. He knew not by what doctrine frequently in the austerity of silence and in 
to explain the inconsistencies, the contradic- the barbarity of penance. 
tlons he experienced ; and, perhaps, it was The person who discovered Schedoni would 
not one of the least, that in these moments not have recollected him had not his remark- 
of dirdiil and conflksting passions his reason able eyes first fixed his attention and then re- 
oookl ftin look down upon their operations, vived remembrance. As he examined his 
and lead him to a cool though brief exami- features he traced the faint resemblance of 
nation of his own nature. But the subtlety what Marinella had been, to whom he made 
of Mtf4ove still eluded his inquiries, and he himself known. 

did not detect that pride was, even at this Theoenfessor affected to have forgotten his 
instant of sdf-examination and of critical former acquaintance, and assured him that 
import, tiie master-q)ring of his mind. In he was mistaken respecting himself, till the 
the earitest dawn of his character this pas- stranger so closely urged some cuxnmistances 
lion had displayed its predominancy when- that the former was no longer permitted to 
ever occasion permitted, and its influence dissemble. He retired in some emotion with 
bad led to some of the chief events ot his the stranger, and. whatever might be the sub- 
life, ject of their conference, he djn^w from him, 

Tlie Count di Marinella, for such had for- before he quitted the convent, a tremendous 

merly been the title of the confessor, was the vow to keep secret from the brotherhood his 

younger son of an ancient family, who resided knowledge of Schedoni's family, and never to 

in the duchy of Milan, and near the feet of reveal, without those walls, that be had seen 

the Tyrblean Alps, on such estates of their him. These requests he had urged in a man- 

anceston as the Italian wars of a former ner that at once surprised and awed the 

eentmr had left them. The portion which stranger, and which, at the same time that it 

he had received at the death of his father manifested the weight of Schedoni's fears, 

was not large, and Schedoni was not of a bade the former tremble for the consequence 

disposition to improve his patrimony by slow of disobedience ; and he shuddered even 

diligence, or to submit to the restraint and while he promised to obey. Of the first part 

humiliation which narrow finances would di the promise he was probably strictly ob- 

have imposed. He disdained to acknowledge servant; whether he was equally so of the 

an inferiority of fortune to those with whom second does not appear ; it is certain that, 

he oonsidn«d himself equal in rank ; and, as after this period, he was never more seen or 

he was destitute of generous feeling and of heard of at Naples. 

sound Judgment, he bad not that loftiness of Schedoni, ever ambitious of distinction, 

soul whi(£ is ambitious of true grandeur, adapted his manners to the views and preju- 

On the contrary, he was satisfied with an dices of the society with whom he resided, 

ostentatious di^lay of pleasures and of and became one of the most exact observera 

power ; and, thoughtless of the consequence of their outward forms, and almost a prodiie<s 

of dissipation, was contented with the plea- for self-denial and severe ^isid^icft. ^c^'w^a 

Biu-es of the moment tih his exhausted re- pointed out by lYie ia\Yi<ecs ol >i!tve caxwn«qX \x^ 

wouroes compelled him to pause and to the juniors as a s^taX «xscm^e, '^tiVi*^ ii«a> 



io6 



THE ITALIAN. 



however, rather to be looked up to with 
reverential admiration than with a hope of 
emulating his sublime virtues. But with such 
panegyrics their friendship for Schedoni con- 
cluded. They found it convenient to ap- 
plaud the austerities which they declined to 
practise ; it procured them a character for 
sanctity, and saved them the necessity of 
earning it by mortifications of their own ; but 
they both feared and hated Schedoni for his 
pride and his gloomy austerities too much to 
gratify his ambition by anything further than 
empty praise. He had been several years in 
the society without obtaining any consider- 
able advancement, and with the mortification 
of seeing persons who had never emulated 
his severity raised to high offices in the 
Church. Somewhat too late he discovered 
that he was not to expect any substantial fa- 
vour from the brotherhood ; and then it was 
that his restless and disappointed spirit first 
sought preferment by other avenues. He 
had been some time confessor to the Marchesa 
di Vivaldi, when the conduct of her son 
awakened his hopes by showing him that be 
might render himself not only useful but 
necessary to her by his counsels. It was his 
custom to study the characters of those 
around him, with a view of adapting them to 
his purposes ; and, having ascertained that of 
the Marchesa, these hopes were encouraged. 
He perceived that her passions were strong, 
her judgment weak ; and he understood that, 
if circumstances should ever enable him to 
be serviceable in promoting the end at which 
any one of those passions might aim, his for- 
tune would be established. 

At length, he so completely insinuated him- 
self into her confidence, and became so 
necessary to her views, that he could demand 
his own terms, and this he had not failed to 
do, though with all the affected delicacy and 
finesse that his situation seemed to require. 
An office of high dignity in the Church, which 
had long vainly excited his ambition, was 
promised him by the Marchesa, who had 
sufficient iniutnce to obtain it ; her condition 
was that of his preserving the honour of her 
family, as she delicatelv termed it, which she 
was careful to make him understand could be 
secured only by the death of Ellena. He 
acknowledged, with the Marchesa, that the 
death of this fascinating young woman was 
the only means of preserving that honour, 
since, \i she lived, they had every evil to ex- 
pect from the attachment and character of 
Vivaldi, who would discover and extricate her 
from any place of confinement, however 
obscure or difficult of access, to which she 
might be conveyed. How long and how 
arduously the confessor had aimed to obUge 
the Marchesa, has already appeared. The 
last scene was now arrived, and he was on 
the eve of committing that atrocious act 
n^hJch was to secure the pride of her house, 



and to satisfy at onoe his ambidon and his 
desire of vengeance, when an emotion, new 
and surprising to him, had arrested his arm 
and compelled his resolution to &lter. But 
this emodon was transient, it disappeared 
almost with the object that awakened it ; and 
now, in the silence and retirement of his 
chamber, he had leisure to re-coHect Ids 
thout^hts, to review his schemes, to reanimate 
his resolution, and to wonder again at tbe 
pity which had almost won him from his pur- 
pose. The ruling passion of his nature once 
more resumed its authority, and he determined 
to earn the honour which the Marchesa had 
in store for him. 

After some cool, and more of tamnltaoiu, 
consideration, he resolved that EUena shoidd 
be assassinated that night, while she slept, 
and afterwards conveyed through a passage 
of the house communicating with tne sea, 
into which the body might be thrown, and 
buried, with her sad story, beneath the waves, 
For his own sake he would have avoided dw 
danger of shedding blood, had this appeared 
easy ; but he had too much reason to kMW 
she had suspicions of poison, to trust to a 
second attempt by such means ; and again 
his indignation rose against himself, since, by 
yielding to a momentary compassion, be bad 
lost the opportunity afforded him of throwing 
her unresistingly into the surge. 

Spalatro, as has already been hinted, wa> 
a former confidant of the confessor, who kmnr 
too truly, from experience, tluLt he could be 
trusted, and had, therefore, engaged him to 
assist on this occasion. To thenands of t^ 
man he consigned the £ate of tibe unhappy 
Ellena, himself recoiling from the horrible act 
he had willed ; and intending by such a stq> 
to involve Spalatro more deeply in the guilt, 
and thus more effectually to secure his secret. 

The night was far advanced before Scho- 
doni's final resolution was taken, when he 
summoned Spalatro to his chamber to instruct 
him in his office. He bolted the door by 
which the man had entered, foi^etting that 
themselves were the only persons in Qiefiouse, 
except the poor Ellena, who, unsuspicious of 
what was conspiring, and her spirits worn out 
by the late scene, was sleeping peacefully on 
her mattress above. Schedoni moved softly 
from the door he had secured, and, beckoning 
Spalatro to approadi, spoke in a low voice, 
as if he feared to be overheard. *' Have3rou 
perceived any sound from her chamber lately? " 
said he. " Does she sleep, think you? " 

' ' No one has moved there for this hour 
past, at least," replied Spalatro. ''I have been 
watching in the corridor till you called, aqd 
should have heard if she had stirred, thie old 
floor shakes so with every step." 

"Then hear me, Spalatro," said tfaecon- 
fessor. " I have tried, and found thee fiaitb- 
ful, or I should not trust ^ee in a business of 
confidence Uke this. Recollect all I said to 



THB ITALIAN, 



107 



thee hi the momhig, and be resolute and 
deateroui, as I have ever found thee." 

Spalatro listened in gloomy attention, and 
the macSL proceeded, " It is late ; go, there- 
fore, to her chamber; be certain that she 
deeps. Take this," he added, *'and this," 
ffiving him a dagger and a large cloak. " You 
Enow how you are to use them." 

He paused, and fixed his penetrating^ eyes 
on Spalatro, who held up the dagger in silence, 
exanuned the blade, and continued to gaze 
t^xm it with a vacant stare, as if he was un- 
conscious of what he did. 

" You know your business," repeated 
Schedoni, authoritatively, " dispatch I time 
wears, and I roust set off early." 

Tlw man made no reply. 

"The morning dawns already," said the 
oonteur, still more urgently, " Do you falter? 
do jroa tremble ? Do 1 not know you ? " 

l^pAlatro put up the poniard in his bosom 
without speaking, threw the doak over his 
ann, and moved with a loitering step towards 
the door. 

*' Dispatch ! " repeated the confessor, " why 
do yon unger? " 

'* I cannot say I like this business, signer," 
said Spalatro, surlily. "I know not why I 
should always do the most, and be paid the 
least" 

"Sordid villain I" exclaimed Schedoni, 
" jfou are not satisfied then I " 

" No more a villain than yourself, signer," 
retorted the 'man, throwing down the cloak, 
" I only do your business ; and 'tis yon that 
are sordid, for you would take all the reward, 
and I would only have a poor man have his 
dues. Do the work yourself, or give me the 
greater profit" 

"Peace I "said Schedoni, "dare no more 
to insult me with the mention of reward. Do 
you imagine I have sold myself! 'Tis my 
will that she dies ; this is sufficient ; and for 
you — the price you have asked has been 
granted." 

"It is too Httle," replied Spalatro, "and 
besides, I do not like the work. What harm 
has she done me? " 

" Since when is it that you have taken upon 
yon tooaoralize?" said the confessor, "and 
how long are these cowardly scruples to last ? 
This is not the first time you have been em- 
ployed; what harm had others done you? You 
foiget that I know you, you forget the past." 

" No, signor, I remember it too well, I 
wish I could forget ; I remember it too well. 
I have never been at peace since. The bloody 
hand is always before me 1 and often of a 
night, when the sea roars and storms shake 
the house, they have come, all gashed as I 
left them, and stood before my bed ! I have 
got up, and ran out upon the shore for 
safety ! " 

" vtMB y* repeated the coafessor, "where 
is tbis fiengy of fwr to end? To what are 



these visions, painted in blood, to lead. I 
thought I was talking whh a man. but find I am 
speaking only to a baby pottessed with his 
nurse's dreams I Yet I understand jrou— you 
shall be satisfied." 

Schedoni, however, had for once misunder- 
stood this man, when he could not helicve it 
possible that he was really averse to ex'Ciite 
what he had undertaken. Whether th" inno- 
cence and beauty of Ellcna had s ftctned his 
hearty or that his conscience did torture him 
for his p-ist detnls. he p>ersistt*d in refusing to 
murder her. His conscience, or his pity, was 
of a very peculiar kind, however ; for, though 
he refused to execute th« deefl himself he 
con<;ented to wait at the foot of a back stair- 
case that communicated with Ellena's cham- 
ber, while Schedoni accomplished it, and after 
ward to assist in carrying the body to the 
shore. " lliis is a compromise between con- 
science and guilt, worthy of a demon," mut- 
terred Schedoni, who appeared to be insensible 
that he had made the same compromise with 
himself not an hour before ; and whose extreme 
reluctance at this moment, to perpetrate with 
his own hand what he had willingly designed 
for another, ought to have reminded him of 
that compromise. 

Spalatro, released from the immmediate 
office of an executioner, endured silently the 
abusive yet half-stifled indignation of the 
confessor, who also bade him reraembo- that 
though he now shrunk from the roost active 
part of this transaction, he had not always 
been restrained, in offices of the same nature, 
by equal compunction ; and that not only his 
means of subsistence but his very life itself 
was at his mercy. Spalatro readily acknow- 
ledged that it was so ; and Schedoni knew 
too well the truth of what he had urged, to 
be restrained from his purpose by any appre- 
hension of the consequence of a discovery 
from this ruffian. 

** Give me the dagger, then," said the con- 
fessor, after a long pause, "take up the 
cloak, and fellow to the stairci«;e. I^t me 
see whether your valour will carry you thus 
far." 

Spalatro resigned the sti'etto, and threw 
the cloak again over his arm. The con- 
fessor stepped to the door, and, trying to 
open it, " It is fastened ! " said he iii alarm, 
" some person has got into the house— it is 
fastened ! " 

" That well may be, signor, " leplied Spala- 
tro, calmly, "for I saw you bolt it yourself, 
after I came into the ro^m." 

"True," said Schedoni, recovering him- 
self; "that is true." 

He opened it and proceeded along the 
silent passages, towards the private slaircase» 
often pausing to Uslen, 3j^^ >i>cvecv ^X^l-^^^.-cv.?, 
more lightly ; l\\e lernSic ^\\e^cycC\> 'm ^\a» 
moment of med\lal\ve ?>i\\x, iea-xt^ ^^w^ ^^^ 
feeble EUena. M lYi^ loo\. oi v>wi ^x^-tcasR. 



zo8 



THE ITALIAN, 



he again stopped to listen, *' Do you hear 
anything ? " said he in a whisper. 

" I hear only the sea," replied the man. 

" Hush i it is something more ! " said 
SchedoDi ; " that is the murmur of voices 1 " 

They were silent. After a pause of some 
length, "It is, perhaps, the voice of the 
spectres I told you of, signor," said Spalatro, 
with a sneer. 

" Give me the dagger," said Schedoni. 

Spalatro, instead of obeying, now grasped 
the arm of the conft^or, who, looking at 
him for an explanation of this extraordinary 
action, was still more surpnsal to observe the 
paleness and horror of his countenance. His 
starting eyes seemed to follow some object 
along Uie passage, and Schedoni, who began 
to partake of his feelings, looked forward to 
discover what occasioned this dismay, but 
could not perceive anything that justified it. 
" What is it you fear ? " said he at length. 

Spalatro's eyes were still moving in horror. 
'* Do you see nothing I " said he, pointing. 
Schedoni looked again, but did not distinguish 
any object in the remote gloom of the passage 
whither Spalatro's sight was now fixed. 

"Come, come," said he, ashamed of his 
own weakness, " this is not a moment for 
such fancies. Awake from this idle dream. 

Spalatro wrthdrew his eyes, but they re- 
tained all their wildness. "It was no dream, " 
said he, in the voice of a man who is ex- 
hausted by paiii and begins to breathe some- 
what more freely again. " I saw it as plainly 
as I now see you." 

"Dotard! what did you see?" inquired 
the confessor. 

" It came before my eyes in a moment, and 
showed itself distinctly and outspread." 

"What showed itself?" repeated Sche- 
doni. 

"And then it beckoned — ^yes, it beckoned 
me, with that blood-stained finger! and 
glided away down the passage, still beckon- 
ing—till it was lost in the darkness." 

"This is very frenzy ! " said Schedoni, ex- 
cessively agitated. "Arouse yourself, and 
be a man ! " 

" Frenry ! would it were, signor. I saw 
that dreadful hand — I see it now— it is there 
again !— there ! " 

Schedoni, shocked, embarrassed, and once 
more infected with the strange emotions of 
Spalatro, looked forward expecting to dis- 
cover some terrific object ; but stMl nothing 
was visible to him, and he soon recovered 
himself sufiiciently to endeavour to appease 
the fancy of this conscience-struck ruffian. 
But Spalatro was insensible to all be could 
urge, and the confessor, fearing that his 
voice, though weak and stifled, would awaken 
Ellena, tried to withdraw him from the spot 
to the apartment they had quitted. 

"The wealth of San Loretto should not 
make me go that way, signor," replied he, 



shuddering—'* that was the way ii bedumedi 
it vanished that way ! " 

Every emotion now yielded with Scbedoal 
to that of apprdiensioa lest EUraa, beta 
awakened, should make his task more horria 
by a struggle ; and his embanassmeot in- 
creased at each instant, for neither cnrnmandt 
menace, nor entreaty conld prenul with Spatap 
tro to retir^ till the monk luckily rememberad 
a door which opened beyond the stairoan 
and would conduct them by another way to 
the opposite side of the house. The man 
consented so to depart, when Schedoni. un- 
locking a suite of rooms of which ha had 
always kept the keys, they passed in dlenca 
through an extent of desolate chamben tfll 
they reached the one which they had latdj 
left. 

Here, relieved from apprehension respect- 
ing Ellena, the confessor expostulated mora 
freely with Spalatro; but neither argument nor 
menace could prevail, and the man p e iaiili ad 
in refusing to return to the staircase^ though 
protesting at the same time that be wooldnot 
remain idone in any part of the boose ; tfll 
the wine, with which the confessor abm-* 
dantly supplied him, began to overoome the 
terrors of his imagination. At len^ hitf 
courage was so much re-animated that he 
consented to resume his station and await aft 
the foot of the stairs the accomplishment of 
Schedoni's dreadful errand, with which ngnu 
ment they returned thither by the way tbew 
had lately passed. The wine with which 
Schedoni also had found it neoeanxy to 
strengthen his own resolution, did not aecnre. 
him from severe emotion when he foond him- 
self again near Ellena ; but he made a 
strenuous effort for self-subjection as he d^ 
manded the dagger of Spalatro. 

" You have it already, signor," replied the 
man. 

"True," said the monk; "ascend softly, 
or our steps may awaken her." 

" You said I was to wait at the foot of tba' 
stairs, signor, while you "— *— 

"True, true, true!" muttered the con- 
fessor, and had begun to ascend, when bis 
attendant desired him to stop. "Yoa are 
going in darkness, signor, you have forgo^iuk 
the lamp. I have another here." 

Schedoni took it angrily, tdthout speaking; 
and was again ascending, when he hesitated. 
and once more paused. "Hie glare wiU 
disturb her," thought he, " it is better to go 

in darkness. Yet ." He considered tluU 

he could not strike with certainty without 
light to direct his hand, and he kept the 
lamp, but returned once more to charge 
Spalatro not to stir from the foot of the stairs 
till he called, and to ascend to the chamber 
upon the first signal. 

" I will obey, signor, if you, on your.psrt. 
will promise not to give the signal till all is 
over." 



tt 



THE ITALIAX. IC9 

I do promisey" replied Schedooi. " No mated li!m ; vengeance nerved his am, and 
more ! " drawing aside the lawn from her bosom, he 

Again he ascended, nor stopped till he once more raised it to strilce ; when, after 
reached EUena's door, where he listened for gazing for an instant, some new cause of 
a sound ; but all was as silent as if death horror seemed to seize all his frame, and he 
already reigned in the chamber. This door stood for some moments aghast and motion- 
was from long disuse, difficult to be opened ; less like a statue. His respiration was short 
formerly it would have yielded without sound and laborious, chilly drops stood on his fore- 
but now Schedoni was fearful of noise from head, and all his facuUies of mind seemed sus- 
every effort be made to move it. After some pended. When he recovered, he stooped to 
difficulty, however, it gave way, and he per- examine again the miniature which h-ad 
cdved, by the stillness within the apartment, occasioned this revolution, and which had Uin 
that he had not disturbed Ellena. He shaded concealed beneath the lawn that he withdrew, 
the lamp with the door for a moment, while The terrible certainty was almost confirmed, 
he threw an inquiring glance forward, and, aad forgetting, in his impatience to know the 
and when he did venture further, held part truth, the imprudence ot suddenly discovering 
of his dark drapery before the light, to pre- himself to hllena at this hour of the night, 
vent the xays from spreading through the and with a dagger at his feet, he called loudly 
room. "Awake ! awake i Say, what is your name ? 

As he approached the bed, her gentle Speak i speak quickly ! " 
breathings informed him that she still slept, Ellena, aroused by a man's voice, started 
and the next moment he was at her &ide. from her mattress, when, pc rceiving Schedoni, 
she lay in deep and peaceful slumber, and and by the pale glare of the lamp, his haKgard 
seemed to' have thrown herself upon the countenance, she shrieked, and sank back on 
mattress, after having been wearied by her the pillow. She had not fainted ; and 
sriefii ; for, though sleep pressed heavily on believing that he came to murder her, she 
her qres, their lids were yet wet with tears. now exerted herself to plead for mercy. 

While Schedoni gazed for a moment upon The energy of her feelings enabled her to 
her innocent countenance, a faint smile stole rise and throw herself at his feet, " lie merci- 
over it. He stepped back. " She smiles in ful, Oh father ! be merciful 1 " said she, in a 
her murderer's face I " said he, shuddering, trembling voice. 
''I must be speedy." ''Fatlier!" interrupted Schedoni, with 

He searched for the dagger, and it was earnestness ; and then, seeming to restrain 
some time before his trembling hand could himself, he added, with unaffected surprise, 
disengage it from the folds of his garment ; '* Why arc you thus terrified ? " for he liad 
but, having done so. he again drew near, and lost, in new interests and emotions, all con- 
prepared to strike. Her dress perplexed him ; sciousness of evil intention, and of the 
it would interrupt the blow, and he stooped singularity of his situation. "What do you 
to examine whether he could turn her robe fear?" he repeated. 

aside, without waking her. As the light " Have pity, holy father I " exclaimed Ellena 
passed over her face, he pesteited that the in agony. 

smile had vanished— the visions of her sleep " Why do you not say whose portrait that 
were changed, for tears stole from beneath is ? " demanded he, forgetting that he had not 
her eyelids, and her features suffered a slight asked the question before, 
convulsion. She ax)ke ! Schedoni, appre- " Whose portrait? " repeated the confessor 
heading that the light had disturbed her, in a loud voice. 

suddenly drew bade, and, again irresolute, "Whose portrait ! " said Ellena, with ex- 
sbaded the lamp, and concesued himself be- trcme surprise. 

hind the curtain, while he listened. But her "Ay, how came you by it? Be quick — 
words were inward and indistinct, and con- whose resemblance is it?" 
tinced him that she still slumbered. "Why should you wish to know?" said 

His agitation and repugnance to strike EUena. 
increased with every moment of delay, and, "Answer my question," repeated Schedoni, 
as often as he prepared to plunge the poniard with increasing sternness. 
in her bosom, a shuddering horror restrained " I cannot part with it, holy father," re- 
him. Astonished at his own feelings, and plied Eilena, pressing it to her bosom ; " you 
indignant at what he termed a dastardly weak- do not wish me to part with it ? " 
ness, he found it necessary toaz^e with him- " Is it impossible to make you answer my 
self, and his rapid thoughts said, " Do I not question ! " said he, in extreme perturbation, 
fe^ the necessity of this act. Does not what and turning away from her ; " has fear utterly 
is dearer to me than existence — does not my confounded you?" Then, again stepping 
consequence depend on the execution of it ? towards her. and seizing her wrist, be re- 
Isshenotalsobeloved by the young Vivaldi? peated the demand in a tone of despera- 
— have I already forgotten the church of the tion. 
Spirito Santo?" TMs consideration re-ani- "Alas! he is deadl or I should not now 



IZO 



THB ITAUAN. 



want a protector," replied EUena, riirinkiiig witbdmw, and ivlieii he oould ftonwnand Ui 
fiom his grasp, and weeping. voice, taid, " unh^ipy child I -^ bdwU 

" Youtiifle," said Schedoni, with a terrible your more unhappy mher 1 " Ai Iw ooa- 
look ; " I once more demand an answer— clnded, his voice was overcome bf gram^ 
whose picture ? " and he drew the cowl entirelv over oil fiua. 

EUena lifted it, gaseduponit for a moment, " My &ther 1 '* exclaimed the a itnnMi e d 
and then pressing it to her lips said, "This and doubting EUena— "my fiitharl" mmI 
was my father." fixed her eyes upon him 

" Your father 1 " he repeated in an inward He gave no re(dv, but when, a momsnt 
voice, "your father 1" and shuddering, turned after, be lifted his head, "Why do yoa »< 
away. proadi me with those looks 1 " said the coi^ 

Euena looked at him with surprise. "I sciousSchedoni. 
never knew a father's care," she said, "nor "Reproachyou!— reproadi mylatlMrl"iei 
till lately did I perceive the want of it. But peated EUena, in accents softemng into Ma- 

demess, " PKily shouM I reproach asy fiitiber 1 " 

" Whyr eidalmed Schedoni, steitiqg 

from his seat. 



now 

" His name?" interrupted the confiessor. 

" But now " continued EUena, "if vou are 
not as a fother to me, to whom can I look for 
protection?" 

"His name?" repeated Schedoni, with 
sterner emphasis. 

"It is sacred," repUed EUena, "for he 
was unfortunate 1 " 

"His name?" demanded the 
furiously. 

' ' I have promised to conceal it, father. " soothing accents of compassion, and looks of 

"On your life, I chaige you teU it; re- anxious gentleness, what made Um id mi- 
member, on your Ufe 1 " happy, and tried to assoajge Ids infftrinai 

EUena trembled, was silent, and with sup- They seemed to increase with eveiy wish Aa 
plicating looks implored him to desist from expressed to dispd them ; aft one monnent be 
inquiry ; but he urged the question more would pause to gase upon her, and in tiie 
irresistibly. " His name then, " said she, next would quit her with a frensM start. 
" was Marinella." "Why do you look so piteondy iqioii mo^ 

father? EUena said ; " wny are toa ao n^ 



As he moved he stumbled over the degiBr 
at his foot; at that mo m en t It offlit 
be said to strike into his heart He podsd 
it hastUy from sight. EQena had not. Ob- 
served it ; but she obsenred Us hboeriqa 
breast, his distracted coantenanoeb and qim 
confessor, steps, as he again walked to and fto In flu 
chamber; and she asked, wllih the 



Schedoni groaned and turned away ; but 
in a few seconds, stniggUng to command the 
agitation that shattered his whole frame, he 
returned to EUena, and raised her from her 
knees, on which she had thrown herself to 
implore mercy. 

"The place of his residence?" said the 
monk. 



happy? TeU me, that I may oomfart vou." 
Inis appeal renewed all the viofanoe of 



remorse and grief, and he pressed her to hta 
bosom, and wetted her dieeks irlth Ui tean. 
EUena wept to see him weep^ tfll lier doobls 
b^^ to take alarm. Whatever m^|^ be te 
proofs that had convinced Sdiedoid of the 
" It was far from hence," she replied ; but rdationship between tibem, he had nioC 



he demanded an unequivocal answer, and 
she reluctantly gave one. 

Schedoni turned away as before, groaned 
heavily, and paced the chamber without 
speaking ; whue EUena, in her turn, inquired 
the motive of his questions, and the occasion 
of his agitation. But he seemed not to 



plained these to her, and however strooK VM 
the eloquence of nature whidi she idtneaidt 
it was not sufficient to justify an entire oob5* 
dence in the assertion he had made^ or to 
aUow her to permit his carenet wtthoot 
trembUng. She shrunk, and endeavomea to 
disengage herself ; when, immediately vndfiv 



notice any thing she said, and wholly standing her, he said, " Can you doobt toe 



given up to his feelings, was inflexibly silent, 
while he stalked, with measured steps, along 
the room, and his face, half hid by his cowl, 
was bent towards the ground. 

EUena's terror began to yidd to astonish- 
ment, and this emotion increased, when, 



cause of these emotions? these signs of pill- 
temal affection?" 

"Have I not reason to doubt," repUed 
EUena. timidly, "since I never wltnesnd unm 
before?" 

He withdrew his arms, and fixing his eyes 



Schedoni approaching her, she perceived earnestly on hers, regarded her for some 



tears swell in his eyes, which were fixed on 
hers, and his countenance soften from the 
wild disorder that had marked it. StiU he 
could nor speak. At length he yielded to the 
fulness of his heart, and Schedoni, the stem 
Schedoni, wept and sighed I He seated him- 
sdf on the mattress beside EUena, took her 
band, wbicb she, amghttd, Attempted to 



ments in expressive alienee. **Poor Innoh 
cent 1 " said he at length, * ' you know not bbir 
much your words convey !— It is too tmey yoa 
never have known a father's tendemaii till 
now 1 " 

His countenance darkened while he 
and he rose again fix>m his seat El 
meanwYnVe, sa\oiE6;aEM^^\»t;ttf^«^ 




THB ITAUAN. 



by a variety of emotkma, had no power to 
demand his reasons for the beliet that so 
much agitated him, or any explanation of his 
conduct; twt she appealed to the portrait, 
and endeavoured, by tracing some resem- 
blance between it and Schedoni, to decide her 
doubts. The countenance of each was as 
different in character as in years. The mi- 
niature displayed a young man, rather hand- 
some, of a gay and smiling countenance ; yet 
the smile expressed triumph rather than 
sweetness, and his whole air and features 
were distinguished by a consciousness of 
superiority that rose even to haughtmess. 

Scbedooi, on the contrary, advanced in 
years, exhibited a severe physiognomy, fur- 
rowed by thought no less than by time, and 
darkened by the habitual indulgence of morose 
pasaions. He looked as if he had never 
smiled since the portrait was drawn ; and it 
seemed as if the painter, prophetic of Sche- 
dooi'a lutnre disposition, had arrested and 
embodied that smile, to pove hereafter that 
cheesfhlneas had once played upon his fea- 
tuics. 

Though the expietsion was so different 
b e twe e n the countenance which Schedoni for- 
merly owned and that he now wore, the same 
character of haughty pride was visible in 
both ; and Ellena did trace a resemblance in 
the bokl outline of the features, but not suffi- 
cient to convince her, without further evidence, 
that each belonged to the same person, and 
that the confessor had ever been the young 
cavalier in the portrait. In the first tiunult of 
her thoughts she had not had leisure to dwell 
upon the singularity of Schedoni's visiting her 
at this deep hour of the night, or to urge any 
questionc, except vague ones, concerning the 
truth of her relatioDship to him. But now 
that her mind was somewhat recollected, and 
that his looks were less terrific, she ventured 
to ask a fuller explanation of these circum- 
stances, and his reasons for the late extraor- 
dinary assertion. "It is past midnight, 
fisther," said Ellena ; "you may judge then 
how anxious I am to learn what motive led 
you to my chamber at this lonely hour ? " 

Schedoni made no reply. 

"Did you come to warn me of danger? " 
she continued ; ' ' bad you discovered the cruel 
designs of Spalatro ? Ah 1 when I supplicated 
Ibr your compassion on the shore this evening, 
you little thought what perils surrounded me, 
or you would — - " 

"Yon say truel" interrupted he, in a 
hurried manner, "but name the subject no 
mot^ Why will you persist in returning to 
it?" 

Hia words surprised Ellena, who had not 

'even alluded to the subj^ till now ; but the 

returning iHldness of ms countenance made 

her fearral of dwelling upon the topic, even so 

fiw as to point out his error. 

Another deep pause succeeded, daring which 



sti 

Schedoni continued to paee the room, some- 
times stopping for an instant to fix his eyes 
on Ellena, and regardhig her with an earnest- 
ness that seemed to partake of frenzv, and 
then gloomily withdrawmg his regards, and 
sighing heavily as he turned away to a dis- 
tant part of the room. She, meanwhile, 
agitated with astonishment at his conduct, as 
well as at her own circumstances, and with 
the fear of offending him by further questions, 
endeavoured to summon courage to solicit the 
explanation which was so important to her 
tranquillity. At length she asked how she 
might venture to believe a circumstance so 
siurprising as that of which he had just 
assured her, and to remind him Uiat he had 
not yet disclosed his reason for admitting the 
belief. 

The confessor's feelings were eloquent ia 
reply ; and when at length they were suffici- 
ently subdued to permit him to talk coherently, 
he mentioned some circumstances concerning 
Ellena's family that proved him at least U> 
have t>een intimately acquainted with it ; and 
others, which she believed were known only 
to Bianchi and herself, that removed every 
doubt of his identity. 

This, however, was a period of his life too 
big with remorse, horror, and the first pangs 
of parental affection to allow him to converse 
long ; deep solitude was necessary for his 
souT. He wished to plunge where no eve 
might restrain his emotions or observe the 
overflowing anguish of his heart. Having 
obtained sufficient proof to convince him that 
Ellena was indeed his child, and assured her 
that she should be removed from this house 
on the following day, and be restored to her 
home, he abruptly left the chamber. 

As he descended the staircase, Spalatro 
stepped forward to meet him with the cloak 
which had been designed to wrap the mangled 
form of Ellena when it should be carried to 
the shore. " Is it done ? " said the ruffian, in 
a stifled voice. " I am ready 1 " and he spread 
forth the doak and began to ascend. 

"Hold! villain, holdl" said Schedoni, 
lifting up his head for the first time. " Dare 
to enter that chamber, and your life shall 
answer for it." 

" What 1 " exclaimed the man, shrinkinjr 
back astonished — ** will not kers satisfy 
you?" 

He trembled for the consequence of what 
he had said when he observed the changing 
countenance of the confessor. But Schedoni 
spoke not : the tumult in his breast was too 
great for utterance, and he pressed hastily 
forward. Srwdatro followed. "Be pleased 
to tell me what I am to do," said he, again 
holding forth the cloak. 

" Avatmt I " exclaimed the other, turning 
fiercely upon him ; "leave me." 

'* How 1 " said the man, whose spirit was 
now aronsed ; *' has yoicr cid>axa:^<& ^aii^»^^Ro« 



tu 



THR ITALIAN. 



signor ? If so, I will prove myself no dastard, 
though you called me one ; ru do the business 
myself.'^ 

• • Villain 1 fiend I " cried Schedoni, seizing 
the ruffian by the throat with a grasp that 
seemed intended to annihilate him ; when, 
recollecting that the fellow was only willing 
to obey the very instructions he had himself 
but lately delivered to him, other emotions 
succeeded to thatof rag^e. He slowly liberated 
him, and in accents broken, and softening 
from sternness, bade him retire to rest. 
••To-morrow," he added, "I will speak 
further with you. As for this night — I have 
changed my purpose. Begone I " 

Spalatro was about to express the indigna- 
tion which astonishment and fear had hither- 
to overcome, but his employer repeated his 
command in a voice of thunder, and closed 
the door of his apartment with violence, as 
he shut out a man whose presence had be- 
come hateful to him. He felt relieved by his 
absence, and began to breathe more freely, 
till, remembering that this accomplice had just 
boasted that he was no dastard, he dreaded 
lest, by way of proving the assertion, he should 
attempt to commit the crime from which he 
had lately shrunk. Terrified at the possibility, 
and even apprehending that it might already 
have become a reality, he rushed from the 
room, and found Spalatro in the passage lead- 
ing to the private staircase ; but, whatever 
might have been his purpose, the situation 
and looks of the latter were sufficiently alarm- 
ing. At the appix}ach of Schedoni he turned 
his sullen and malignant countenance towards 
him. without answering the call or the de- 
mand as to his business there ; and with slow 
steps obeyed the order of his master, that he 
should withdraw to his room. Thither Sche- 
doni followed, and having locked him in it for 
the night, he repaired to the apartment of 
Ellena, which he secured from the possibility 
of intrusion. He then returned to his own, 
not to sleep, but to abandon himself to the 
agonies of remorse and horror ; and he yet 
shuddered, like a man who has just recoiled 
from the brink of a precipice, and who still 
measures the gulf with his eye. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

"PLLENA, when Schedoni had left her, 
■■-' recollected all the particulars which he 
had thought proper to reveal concerning her 
family, and, comparing them with such cir- 
cumstances as the late Bianchi had related on 
the same subject, she perceived nothing that 
was contradictory between the two accounts. 
But she knew not even yet enough of her own 
story to understand why Bianchi had been 
silent as to some particulars which had just 
2}eea disclosed. From Bianchi she had always 
uaaerstood that her mother bad married a 



nobleman of the duchy of Milan, and of the 
house of Marinella ; that the mairiage bad 
been unfortunate ; and that she heradif, even 
before the death of the Countess, had been 
committed -to the care of Blandil, the oalf 
sister of that lady. Of this event, or of- bet 
mother, Ellena had no remembrance ; for the 
kindness of Bianchi had obliterated from her 
mind the loss and the griefs of her early in- 
fancy ; and she recollected only the accident 
which had discovered to her, in Bianchi's 
cabinet, after the death of the latter, the 
miniature and the name of her fiatiier. Wlien 
she had inquired the reason of this injonccioa; 
Bianchi replied that the d^fraded fortune of 
her house rendered privacy desirable ; and 
answered her further questions conoemiag 
her father by relating that he had died while 
she was an infant. The picture which Ellena 
had discovered, Bianchi had found amoBff 
the trinkets of the departed Countese^ and 
designed to present it at some future pMPiod 
to Ellena, when her discretion might be trufled 
with a knowledge of her family. This was 
the whole of what Signora Bianchi bad jndgiBd 
it necessary to expUun. though in^ her but 
hours it appeared that she irished to reveal 
more ; but it was then too late. 

lliough Ellena perceived t^ many drcdm- 
stances of the relations given 1^ Schedoni 
and by Signora Bianchi oofaicidea, and dMtf 
none were contradictory except that of hU 
death,she could not yet subdue neramaietaient 
at this discovery, or even the doubts wfakii 
occasionally recurred to her as to its truth. 
Schedoni, on the contrazy, bad not even 
appeared surprised when she assured him' 
that she always understood her fiober had 
been dead many years ; though, mhea she 
asked if her mother too was living, both hii 
distress and his assurances confirmed ttib 
relation made by Bianchi. 

When Ellena s mind became nxire tranquil 
she noticed again the singularity of Schedoni's 
visit to her apartment 9t so sacred an hour ; 
and her thoughts glanced back involuntari^ 
to the scene of the preceding evening on m 
sea- shore, and the image of her father ap- 
peared in each in the terrific character of an' 
agent ol the Marchesa di Vivaldi. The sus- 
picions, however, which she had formerly 
admitted respecting his designs were now 
impatiently rejected, for she was less anxious to 
discover truth than to release herself fix>m 
horrible suppositions ; and she willingly be- 
lieved that Schedoni, having misunderstood 
her character, had only designed to assist in 
removing her beyond the reach of Vbrakll. 
The ingenuity of hope suggested also that 
having just heard from her conductors, or- 
from Spalatro, some drcumstances of her' 
story, he had been led to a suspicion at tiw 
relationship between them, and that, in the 
first impatience of parental anxiety, he had 
disregaxded \ihe \io\ix, axA qwbda, ^^vi^aJL 



THE ITALIAN. 113 

midnight, to her apartment to ascertain the at present than by the honour of the coonec- 

tmth. tion. He had some particular reasons for 

While she soothed herself with this expla- believing that her consent might be obtained, 
nation of a circumstance which bad occa- and, though there was hazard in delaying the 
sfonedbo'considerable surprise, she perceived nuprials till such an experiment had been 
on the floor the point of a dagger peeping made, he resolved to encounter it rather than 
from benetUh the curtain I Emotions almost forbear to solicit her concurrence. Rut, if 
too horrible to be sustained followed this the Marchesa should prove inexorable, he 
di scov er y ; she took the instrument, and determined to bestow the hand of Kllcna 
gazed upon it aghast and trembling, for a without her knowledge, and in doing so he 
suspicion of the real motive of Schedoni's well knew that he incurred little danger from 
visit glanced upon her mind. But it was her resentment, since he had secrets in his 
only lor a moment ; such a supposition was possession the consciousness of which must 
too terrible to be willingly endured ; she awe her into a speedy neutrality. The con- 
again believed that Spalatro alone had medi- sent of the Marchese, as he despaired of ob- 
tated her destruction, and she thanked the taining it, he did not mean to solicit, and the 
confessor as her deliverer, instead of shrink- influence of the Marchesa was such that 
Ing from him as an assassin. She now under- Schedoni did not regard that as essential, 
stood that Schedoni, having discovered the The first steps, however, to be taken were 
tirfKan's design, had rushed into the chamber those that might release Vivaldi from the In- 
to save a stranger from his murderous pon- quisition, the tremendous prison into which 
Sard, and had unconsciously rescued his own Schedoni himself, little foreseeing that he 
daughter, when the portrait at her bosom in- should so soon wish for his liberation, had 
Conned him of the truth. With this convic- caused him to be thrown. He had always 
lion Ellena's eyes overflowed with gratitude, understood, indeed, that if the informer for- 
•nd her heart was bushed to peace. bore to appear against the accused in this 

Schedoni, meanwhile, shut up in his cham- court, the latter would of course be libe- 
ber, was agitated by feelings of a very oppo- rated ; and he also believed that Vivaldi's 
site nature. When their first excess was freedom could be obtained whenever he 
exhausted, and his mind was calm enough to should think proper to apply to a person at 
reflect, the images that appeared on it struck Naples, whom he knew to be connected with 
him with solemn wonder. In pursuing £1- the Holy OJlce of Rome. How much the 
lena at the criminal instigation of the Mar- confessor bad suffered his wishes to deceive 
chesa di Vivaldi, it appeared that he had been him may appear hereafter. His motives for 
persecuting his own child ; and in thus con- having thus confined Vivaldi wo-e partly 
senting to conspire against the innocent, he those of self-defence. He dreaded the dis- 
had in the event been only punishing the covery and the vengeance which might follow 
guilty, and preparing mortification for him- the loss of Ellena should Vivaldi be at liberty 
self on the exact subject to which he had immediately to pursue his inquiries. But he 
sacrificed his conscience. Every step that he believed that. all trace of her must be lost 
had taken with a view of gratifying his ambi- after a few weeks had elapsed, and that Vi- 
tion was retrograde, and while he had been valdi's sufferings from confinement in the In- 
wickedly intent to serve the Marchesa and quisition would have given interests to his 
hioiself, hf preventing the marriage of Vi- mind which must wesdcen the one he felt for 
valdi and Ellena, he had been laboriously Ellena. Yet, though in this instance self- 
counteracting his own fortune. An alliance defence had been a principal motive with 
with the illustrious house of Vivaldi was Schedoni, a desire of avenging the insult 
above his loftiest hope of advancement, and he had received in the church of the Spirito 
this event he had himself nearly prevented Santo, and all the consequent mortifications 
by the very means which had been adopted, he experienced, had been a second ; and such 
at the expense of every virtuous considera- was the blackness of his hatred, and the 
tion, to obtain an inferior promotion. Thus^ avarice of his revenge, that he had not con- 
by a singular retribution, his own crimes had sidered the suffering which the loss of Ellena 
recoiled upon himself. would occasion Vivaldi as sufficient retaliation. 

Schedoni perceived the many obstacles In adopting a mode of punishment so ex- 
which lay between him and his newly awak- traordinary as that of imprisonment in the 
ened hopes, and that much was to be over- Inquisition, it appears, therefore, that Sche- 
come before those nuptials could be publicly doni was influenced partly by the difficulty 
solemnised, which he was now still more of otherwise confining Vivaldi during the 
anxious to promote than he had lately been period for which confinement was absolutely 
to prevent. The approbation of the Mar- necessary to the success of his own schemes, 
chesa was, at least, desirable, for she had and partly by a desire of inflicting the tor- 
much at her disposal, and without it, though tures of terror. HehadalsobeAwe?^&n>\a%9^«^ 
his daughter might be the mfe of Vivaldi, by his discoverv oi \Jtv\s op^T\>MiL\Vj Vst cssa- 
be luwself would be no otherwise benefited ferringnew ob'Ug,al\oifiQu\k<&VlftxOEi^:^* '^^^ 



XI4 



THR ITALIAN. 



very conduct that must have appeared to the 
first glance of an honest mind fatal to his in- 
terests, he thought might be rendered benefi- 
cial to them, and that his dexterity could so 
command the business as that the Marchesa 
should eventually thank him as the deliverer 
of her son, insteaul of discovering and execrat- 
ing him as his accuser— a scheme favoured 
by the unjust and cruel rule enacted by the 
tribunal he approached, which permitted 
anonymous informers. 

To procure the arrestation of Vivaldi, it 
had been only necessary to send a written 
accusation, without a name, to the Holy Office^ 
with a mention of the place where the accused 
person might be seized. But the suffering in 
consequence of such information did not 
always proceed further than the question : 
since, if the informer failed to discover him- 
self to the Inquisitors, the prisoner, after many 
examinations, was released, unless he hap- 
pened unwarily to criminate himself. Sche- 
dooi, as he did not intend to prosecute, be- 
lieved, therefore, that Vivaldi would of course 
be discharged after a certain period, and 
supposing it utterly impossible that he could 
ever discover his accuser, the confessor deter- 
mined to appear anxious and active in effecting 
his release. 1 h'S character of a deliverer he 
knew he should be the better enabled to sup- 
port by means of a person officially t onnected 
with the Holy Office, who had already uncon- 
sciously assisted his views. In the apartment 
of this man, Schedoni had accidentally seen a 
formula of arrestation against a person sus- 
pected of heresy, the view of which had not 
only suggested to him the plan he had since 
adopted, but had in some degree assisted him 
to carry it into effect He had seen the scroll 
only for a short time, but his observations 
were so minute, and his memory so clear, 
that he was able to copy it with at least suffi- 
cient exactness to impose upon the Benedic- 
tine priest, who had, perhaps, seldom or never 
seen a real instrument of this kind. Schedoni 
had employed this artifice for the purpose of 
immediately securing Vivaldi, apprehending 
that, while the Inquisitors were slowly deli- 
berating upon his arrest, he might quit Celano 
and elude discovery. If the deception suc- 
ceeded, it would enable him also to seize 
Eliena, and to mislead Vivaldi respecting her 
destination. The charge of having canied 
off a nun might appear to be corroborated by 
many circumstances, and Schedoni would 
probably have made these the subject of real 
denunciation, had he not foreseen the danger 
and the trouble in which it might implicate 
himself ; and that, as the charge could not be 
substantiated, EUena would finally escape. 
As far as his plan now went, it had been suc- 
cessful ; some of the bravoes whom he hired 
to personate officials had conveyed Vivaldi 
to the town where the real officers of the In- 
quisition were appointed to receive him ; while 



the others carried Ellena to the sliore of the 
Adriatic. Schedoni had much applauded his 
own ingenuity, in thus contriving, bj the 
matter of the forged accusation, to throw an 
impenetrable veil over the fate of EUena, and 
to secure himself from the suspicions or Ven- 
geance of Vivaldi, who, it appeaxecl, wonld 
always believe that she had died or was stn 
confined in the unsearchable prisons of thfl 
Inquisition. 

Thus \i.t had betrs^ed himself in endeflp 
vouring to betray Vivaldi, whose releasCi 
however, he yet supposed could be easily 
obtained ; but how much his poUcy had. in 
this instance, outrun his sagacity now re- 
mained to be proved. 

The subject of Sdiedcmi's immediate per- 
plexity was the difficulty of conveying EUena 
back to Naples ; since, not choosing to appear 
at present in the character of her fother,*be 
could not decorously accompany her thither 
himself, nor could he prudently entrust her to 
the conduct of any person whom he knew in 
this neighbourhood. It was, however, neoes- 
sary to form a speedy determination, for he 
could neither endure to pass another day \x^% 
scene which must continually impress him 
with the horrors of the pieceding night, nor 
that Ellena should remain in it ; and the 
murning light already gleamed upon his case- 
ments. 

After some further deliberation, he resolved 
to be himself her conductor, as Deut, at least, 
as through the forests of the Gaiganus ; and, 
at the first town where conveniences could be 
procured, to throw aside his monk's habit, 
and, assuming the dress of a layman, accom- 
pany her in this disguise towaitls Naples, till 
he should either discover some secure means 
of sending her forward to that city, or a tem- 
porary asylum for her in a convent on the 
way. 

His mind was scarcely more tranquil after 
having formed this determination than be- 
fore, and he did not attempt to repose him- 
self even for a moment. The circumstances 
of the late discovery were almost perpetuaUy 
recurring to his affrighted conscience, accom- 
panied by a fear that EUena might suspect 
the real purpose of his midnight visit ; and 
he altematelv formed and rejected plausible 
falsehoods that might assuage her curiosity 
and delude her apprehension. 

The hour arrived, however, when it was 
necessary to prepare for departure, and found 
him still undecided as to the explanation he 
should form. 

Having released Spalatro from his chamber, 
and given him directions to procure horses 
and a guide immediately from the neighbour- 
ing hamlet, he repaired to EUena's room to 
prepare her for this hasty removal. On ap- 
proaching it, a remembrance of the purpose 
with which he had last passed through these 
same passages and staircase appealed so 



THB ITAUAN, 



««5 



powerfully to his feelings that he was unable 
to proceed, and he turned back to his own 
apcurtment to recover some command over 
himself. A few moments restored to him his 
usual address, though not his tranquillity, and 
he again approached the chamber ; it was 
now, however, by way of the corridor. As 
he unbarred the door, his hand trembled ; 
but, when he entered the room, his counte- 
nance and manner had resumed their usual 
solemnity, and his voice only would hnve be- 
trayed, to an attentive observer, the agitation 
of his mind. 

Ellena was considerably affected on seeing 
him again, and he examined with a jealous 
eye the emotions he wi messed. The smile 
with which she met him was tender, but he 
perceived it pass away from her features, like 
the aerial colouring that illumines a moun- 
tain's brow ; and the gloom of doubt and 
apprehension again overspread them. As he 
advanced, he held forth his hand for her's. 
when, suddenly perceiving the dagger he had 
Idft hi the chamber, he involuntarily M'ith- 
drew his proffered courtesy, and his counte- 
nance changed. Ellena. whose eyes followed 
his to the object that attracted them, pointed 
to tlie instrument, took it up, and, approach- 
log him, said. "This dagger I found last 
night in my chamber ! Oh, my father.! " 

"That dagger 1 " said Schedoni with affected 
surprise. 

" Examine it," continued Ellena, while she 
held it up. " Do you know to whom it belongs 
and who brought it hither? " 

'* What is it you mean?" asked Schedoni, 
betraved by his feelings. 

" Do you know, too. for what purpose it 
was brought? " said Ellena, mournfully. 

TIm confessor made no reply, but irreso- 
hitely attempted to seise the instrument. 

••Oh yes, I perceive you know too well," 
continued Ellena. "Here, my father, while 
Islept " 

" Give me the dagger," interrupted Sche- 
doni, in a frightful voice. 

•' Yes, my fiather, I will give it as an offer- 
ing of my gratitude," replied Ellena ; but as 
she mised her ^es. filled with tears, his look 
and fixed attitude terrified her, and she added, 
with a stiU more persuasive tenderness, "Will 
you not accept the offering of your child, for 
having preserved her from the poniard of an 
assassin ? " 

Schedoni's looks became yet darker ; he 
took the dagger in silence, and threw it with 
violence tothe farthest end of the chamber, 
while his eyes remained fixed on hers. The 
force of the action alarmed her. " Yes, it is 
in vain that you would conceal the truth," she 
added, weeping unrestrainedly, "your good- 
ness cannot avail ; I know the whole." 

The last words aroused Schedoni again 
from his trance, his features became con- 
vulsed, and hJ5 look furious, ''What do 



my 



you know ? " he demanded, in a subdued voice 
that seemed ready to burst in thunder. 

••All that I owe you," replied Ellena, " that 
last night, while I slept upon this mattress, 
unsuspicious of what was desij^ncd aj^ainst 
me. an assassin entered the chamber with that 
instrument in his h.ind, and — ^ " 

A stifled gro.in from Schedoni checked 
EUen.i ; sh" o*)s Tved his rolling eyi-s. and 
trembled; till, h li«vin>f that his agiMtion 
was occasioned [)y indigna'ion agiinst tlitr as- 
sassin, she resum»*d, "Why should yo'i think 
it nece-^ary to co'iceal the danger which has 
threat ♦•ned me, sine it is to you that I owe 
my ddiverance from it? Oh. my fa'ht-r ! do 
not df-ny me the pleasure of shedding tf-irs of 
gratitude, do not refuse the thanks which are 
due to you ! While I slept upon that couch, 
while a ruffian sto^c upi n my slumber it was 
you, yes I can I ever forjjet that it was 
father who saved me from his poniard ! " 

Schedoni's passions were changed, but they 
were not le?s violent ; he could sjarcely con- 
trol them, while he said in a tremulous tone. 
• • It is enough, sny no more ; " and he raised 
Ellena, but turned away without embracing 
her. 

His strong emotion, as he paced in silence 
the farthest end of the apartment, excited 
her surprise, but she then attributed it to a 
remembrance of the perilous moment from 
which he had resc led her. 

Schedoni, meanwhile, to whom her thanks 
were diijgers, was trying to subdue the feel- 
ings of remorse that tore his heart ; and was 
so enveloped in a world of his own as to be 
for some time unconscious of all around him. 
He continued to stalk in gloomy sil^-nce along 
the chamber, till the voice of Kllcna, entreat- 
in? him rather to rejoice that he had been 
permitted to save her, than so deeply to consider 
dangers which were past, again touched the 
chord that vibrated to his conscience, and re- 
called him to a sense of his situation. He 
then bade her prepare for immediate de- 
parture, an'i abruptly quitted the room. 

Vainly hoping that in flying from the scrne 
of his meditated crime he should leave with 
it the acuteness of remembrance and the 
agonising stings of remorse, he was now more 
anxious than ever to leave the place. Yet he 
should still be accompanied by Ellena. and her 
innocent looks, her affectionate thanks, in- 
flicted an anguish which was scarcely endur- 
able. Sometimes, thinking that her hatred, 
or what to him would be still severer, her 
contempt, must be more tolerable than this 
gratitude, he almost resolved to undeceive 
her respecting his conduct, but as constantly 
and impatiently repelled the thouvjht with 
horror, and finsdly determined to suflcr her to 
account for his late extraordinary visit in the 
wav she had chosen. 

Spalatro, at \ei\g\.Yi, xftVcLtrvt^ VtoxaSJcv't V^xc^- 
Ict with horses, ^SxX'mvXxoux^vwiVci^Vt^^^'^^^ 



iz6 THE ITA LIAN, 

a guide to conduct the travellers through a lingly have ceased to think. Ellena guided 

tract of the long-devolving forests of the Gar- her horse still closer to Schedoni's, but, for- 

ganus which it was necessary for them to bearing to urge the inquiry otherwise than by 

pass. No person had been willing to under- looks, she received no reply, and endeavouiea 

take so arduous a task ; and Spalatro, who to quiet her apprehensions by considering 

was well acquainted with all the labyrinths of that he would not have pennitted this maa to 

the way, now offered his services. be their guide unless he had believed he 

Schedoni, though he could scarcely endure might be trusted. This consideration, thonph 

the presence of this man. had no alternative it relieved her fears, increased her perplentjr 

but to accept him, since he had dismissed the respecting (he late designs of Spaiatio and 

guide who had conducted him hither. Of her surprise that Schedoni, if he had rei^ 

personal violence Schedoni had no apprehen- understood them to be evil, should endure h& 

sion. though he too well imderstood the villsiiny presence. Every time she stole a glanoe at 

of his proposed companion ; for he considered the dark countenance of this man, rendered 

that he himself should be well armed, and he still darker by the shade of the trees, she 

determine to ascertain that Spalatro was thought "assassin" was written in each line of 

without weapons ; he knew also that in case it, and she could scarcely doubt that he, and 

of a contest his own superior stature would not the people who had conducted her to the 

easily enable him to overcome such an an- mansion, had dropped the dagger in her 

tagonist. chamber. Whenever she looked round 

Everything being now ready for departure, through the deep glades and on the forestF> 

Ellena was summoned, and the confessor led mountains that on every side closed the scene 

her to his own apartment, where a slight and seemed to exclude all cheerful haunt of 

breakfast was prepared. man, and then r^;arded her companions, her 

Her spirits being revived by the speed of heart sank, notwithstanding the reasons she 

this departure, she would again have ex- had for believing herself in the protecuon of 

pressed her thanks, but he peremptorily in- a father. Nay, the very loc4s of Schedoni 

terrupted her and forbade any further men- himself, more than once remimiing her of hi$ 

lion of gratitude. appearance on the sea-shore, renewed the Ln- 

On entering the court where the horses pressions of alarm and even of dismay which 

were in waiting, and perceiving Spalatro, she had there experienced. At such moments 

Ellena shrank and put her arm within Sche- it was scarcely possible for her to oonsidtt 

doni's for protection. " What recollections him as her parent, and, in spite of every late 

does the presence of that man revive? " said appearance, strange and unaccountable donbtil 

she. " I can scarcely venture to believe my- began to gather on her mind, 
self safe even with you when he is here." Schedoni, meanwhile, lost in thongbt* 

Schedoni made no reply till the remark was broke not by a single word the deep silence 

repeated. " You have nothing to fear from of the solitudes through which they passed. 



him, " muttered the confessor while he has- Spalatro was equally mute, and equally 

tened her forward, " and we have no time to gaged with his reflections on the sudden 

lose in vague apprehension." change in Schedoni's purpose, and by wonder 

"Howl" exclaimed Ellena. "Is not he as to the motive which could have induced 

the assassin from whom you saved me ? I him to lead Ellena in safety from the verf 

cannot doubt that you know him to be such, spot whither she was brought by his eaEpresB 

though you would spare me the pain of be- command to be destroyed. He, however. 

lieving so." was not so wholly occupied as to be unmind- 

" Well, well, be it so," replied the con- ful of his situation, or unwatchfiil of ^ op- 

fessor. "Spalatro, lead the horses this way." portunity of serving his own intereste, and 

The party were soon mounted, when, quit- retaliating upon Schedoni for the treatment 

ting this eventful mansion and the shore of he had received on the preceding night, 

the Adriatic as Ellena hoped, for ever, they Amongst the various subjects that disdnscftd 

entered upon the gloomy wilderness of the the confessor, the difficulty of disposing of 

Garganus. She often turned her eyes back Ellena, without betraying at Naples that she 

upon the house with emotions of inexpressible was his relative, was not the least distressing, 

awe, astonishment, and thankfulness, and Whatever might be the reason which ooiwl 

gazed while a glimpse of its turreted walls justify such feelings, his fears of a premature 

could be caught be>ond the dark branches discovery of the circumstance to the society 

which, closing over it, at length shut it from with whom he lived were so strong as to often 

her view. The joy of this departure, how- produce the most violent effect upon his 

ever, was considerably abated by the pre- countenance ; and it was, perhaps, when he 

sence of Spalatro, and her fearful countenance was occupied by this subject, that its terrific 

inquired of Schedoni the meaning of his expression revived with Ellena the. last scene 

being suffered to accompany them. The con- uplon the shore. His embarrassment was not 

fessor was reluctant to speak concerning a less as to the excuse to be offered the Mar« 

roan of whose very existence he would wil- chcsa for having failed to fulfil his engage- 



THB ITALIAN. 117 

ment, and r wper J 'hy t!ie means by which he must be acquainted with the present situa- 
might interest her m favour of Ellena, and tion of Vivaldi, she was continually on the 
even dispose her to approve the marriase point of mentioning him. but was as con- 
before she should be informed of the fiamOy suntly restrained by timidity ; though, had 
of this mifbitnnate young woman. Peroeiv- she suspected him to be an inhabitant of the 
ing all the necessity for ascertaing the proba- Inquisition, her scruples would have vanished 
bilid'es ol socfa consent before he ventured before an irresistible interest. As it whs, tw- 
to make an avowal of her orimn, he deter- lieving that he, like herself, had beea im- 
mined not to reveal himself tillhe should be posed upon by the Marchesa's agents in the 
perfecthr sore that the discovery would be disguise of officials, she concluded, as has 
aocepCaole to the M archesa. In the mean- before appeared, that he now suffered a tem- 
time. as it would be necessary to say some- porary imprisonment, by order of bis mother, 
thins ^ Etlena's birth, he meant to declare at one of (be family villas. When, however, 
that he had d isc overed it to be noble, and her Schedoni, awaking from his reverie, abrupt -v 
fiunily worthy in every respect of a connec- mentioned Vivaldi, her spirits fluttered with 
tion with that of the VivaUi. impatience to learn his exact situation, and 

An interview with the Marchesa was almost she inquired repecting it. 
equally wished for and dreaded by the coo- "I am no stranger to your attachment," 
fnsor. He shuddered at the expectation of said Schedoni, evading ihe question, "but I 
meeting a woman who had instigated him to wish to be informed of some circumstances 
the minder of his own child, which, though rdative to its commencement." 
he bad been happily prevented firom commit- EUena, confused, and not knowing what 
ting it, was an act that would still be wished to reply, was for a moment silent, and then 
for by the Marchesa. How could he endure repeated her inquiry, 
her reproaches when she should discover **'\^ere did you first meet?" said the 
that he bad failed to accomplish her will ! confessor, still disrei^arding her question. 
How conceal the indignation of a fiather, and Ellena related that she had first seen Vivaldi 
dissimulate all a £EUher's various feelings, when attending her aunt from the church 
wh^ in reply to such reproaches, he must of San Lorenzo. For the present she was 
form excuses and act htmiility from which spared the embarrassment of further explana- 
his whole soul would revolt 1 Never could tion by Spalatro, who. riding up to Schedoni, 
his arts of dissimulation have been so severely informed him they were .ipproacbing the 
tried, not even in the bte scenes with Ellena, town of Zanii. On looking forward, Ellena 
never have returned upon himself in punish- perceived houses peepinji; from among the 
ment so severe, as in that which awaited him forest-trees at a short disunce, and presently 
with the Marchesa ; and from its approach the heard the cheerful bark of a dog — that sure 
ciool and politic Schedoni often shrank in such herald and faithful servant of man. 
horror thist he almost determined to avoid it Soon after the travellers entered Zanii. a 
at any hanrd, and secretly to unite Mvaldi small town surrounded by the forest, where, 
and Ellena without even soliciting the con- however, the poverty of the inhabitants seemed 
sent of the Marchesa. to forbid a longer stay than was absolutely 

A desire; however, of the immediate prefer- necessar>- for repose and a slight refreshment. 
ment, so necessary to his pride, constantly Spalatro led the way to a cabin, in which the 
checked this scheme, and finally made him few persons who journeyed this road were 
willing to subject every honest feeling, and usually entertained. The appearance of the 
submit to any meanness, however vicious, peof^ who owned it was as wild as their 
rather thsm forego the favourite object of his coimtry, and the interior of the dwelling was 
erroneous ambition. Never, perhaps, was so dirty and comfortless that, Schedoni pre- 
tbe pamdoxical union of pride and abject^ ferring to talce his repast in the open air, a 
ness more strongly exhibited tlian on this table was spread under the luxuriant shade of 
occasion. the forest-trees at a little distance. Here, 

While thus the traveller silently proceeded, when the host had withdrawn and Spalatro 
EUena's thoughts often turned to Vivaldi, had been despatched to examine the post- 
and she considered, with trembling anxiety, horses and to procure a lay habit for the con- 
the fSkxX which the late discovery was likely feasor, the latter, once more alone with 
to have upon their future lives. It appeared EUena, began to exi)erience again somewhat 
to her that Schedoni must approve of a con- of the embarrassments of conscience : and 
nection thus flattering to the pride of a father, Ellena, whenever her eyes glanced upon him, 
though he vrould probably refuse his consent suffered a solemnity of Hear that rose almost 
to a private marriage. And, when she fur- to terror. He at length terminated his eni- 
ther considered the revolution which a know- phatic silence by renewing his mention of 
ledge of her fiunily might occasion towards Vivaldi and his command that Ellena should 
herself in the minds of the Vivaldi, her pros- relate the history of their affection. Not 
pects seemed to brighten and her cares daring to refuse, she obeyed, but with as 
began to dissipate. Judging that Schedoni much brevity as possible, and Schedoni did 



zz8 



THB ITALIAN. 



not interrupt her by a single observation. 
However eligible their nuptials now appeared 
to him, he forbore to give any hint of appro- 
bation, till he should have extricated the object 
of her regards from his perilous situation. 
But, with EUena, this silence implied the 
very opinion it was meant to conceal, and, 
encouraged by the hope it imparted, she ven- 
ture d once more to ask by whose or"*er Vi- 
valdi had been arrested ; whither he had been 
conveyed, and the circumstances of his pre- 
sent situation. 

Too politic to intrust her with a knowledge 
of his actual condition, the confessor spared 
her the anguish of leamini; that Vivaldi was 
a prisoner in the Inquisition. He afifected 
i(?norance of the late trans-iction at (Delano, 
but ventured to believe that both Vivaldi and 
herself had been arrested by order of the 
Marchesa, who, he conjectured, had thrown 
him into temporary confinement, a measure 
which she, no doubt, had meant to enforce 
also towards EUena. 

"And you, my father?" observed Ellena, 
* ' what brought you to my prison— you who 
were not informed of the Marchesa's designs? 
What accident conducted you to that remote 
solitude, just at the moment when you could 
save your child ? " 

" Informed of the Marchesa's designs! " said 
Schedoni, with embarrassment and displea- 
sure. " Have you ever imagined that I could 
be accessory — that I could consent to assist, I 
mean could consent to be a confidant of such 
atrocious " Schedoni, bewildered, con- 
founded, and half-betrayed, restrained him- 
self. 

" Yet you have said the Marchesa meant 
only to confi^ne me ? " observed Ellena ; " was 
that design so atrocious? Alas I my father, 
I know too well that her plan was more atro- 
cious, and since you also had too much reason 
to know this, why do you say that imprison- 
ment only was intended for me ? But your 
solicitude for my tranquillity leads you to " 

" What means," interrupted the suspicious 
Schedoni, *' can I particularly have of under- 
standing the Marchesa's schemes? I repeat, 
that I am not her confidant ; how then is it 
to be supposed I should know that they ex- 
tended further than to imprisonment? " 

" Did you not save me from the arm of the 
assassin," said EUena, tenderly; "did not 
you wrench the very dagger from his grasp 1 " 

*• I had forgotten, I had forgotten," said the 
confessor, yet more embarrassed. 

"Yes, good minds are ever thus apt to for- 
get the benefits they confer, " replied Ellena. 
" But you shall find, my father, that a grate- 
ful heart is more watchful to remember them ; 
it is the indelible register of every act that is 
dismissed from the memory of the bene- 
factoT." 
'* Mention no more of benefits, " said Scho- 
doni, impatiently; "letfUence on this subjea 



henceforth faidietto your wish to oblife 
me." 

He rose, and joined the host, who was at 
the door of his cabin. Schedoni wishjod to 
dismi8<i Spalatro as soon as possible, and be 
Inquired for a guule to conduct him throoKh 
that p<u-t of the forest which remained to be 
traversed. In this poor town a person will- 
ing to undertake that office was easily to be 
found, but the ha^t went in quest of a neigb* 
bour whom he had recommended. 

Meanwhile Spalatro returned Without hav- 
ing succeedei in his commission. Not any 
lay-habit could be procured, upon ao shcnt a 
notice, that suited Schedoni. tie was obliged, 
therefore, to continue his journey, to the next 
town at least, in his own dress ; but the 
necessity was not very serious to him, since it 
was improbable that ne should be known in 
this obscure region. 

Presently the host appeared with his neigh- 
bour, when Schedoni, having received satis- 
factory answers to his questions, engaged Um 
for the remainder of the forest-road, and 
dismissed Spalatra The ruffian departed 
vrith sullen reluctance and evident illrwili« 
circumstances which the confessor scaxcdy 
noticed while occupied by the satisfaction m. 
escaping from the presence of the atrocions 
partner of his conscience. But EUena, as he 
passed her, observed the malignant disappoint- 
ment of his look, and it served only to heighten 
the thankfulness his absence occasioned ner. 

It was afternoon before the traveUers pro- 
ceeded. Schedoni had calculated that they 
could easily reach the town at which he 
designed to pass the night before the dose 
of evening, and he had been in no haste to 
set forward during the heat of the day. 
Their track now lay through a country less 
savage, though scarcely less wild, than that 
they had passed in the morning. It emezged 
from the interior towards the border of the 
forest ; they were no longer inclosed by im- 
pending mountains ; the withdrawing shades 
were no longer impenetrable to the eye, bat 
now and then opened to gleams of sunshine, 
landscape, and blue distances ; and, in the 
immediate scene, many a green glade sproui 
its bosom to the sun. The grandeur m tbe 
trees, however, did not decline ; the plane, 
the oak, and the chestnut stiU threw a pomp 
of foliage round these smiling spots, and 
seemed to consecrate the mountain streams 
that descended beneath their s(demn shade. 

To the harassed spirits of Ellena the 
changing scenery was refreshini;, and she 
frequently jrielded her cares to the influence 
of mije^tic nature. Over the gloom of Sche* 
doni no scenery had, at any moment, power; 
the shape and paint of external imagery gave 
neither impression nor colour to 1& fancy. 
He contemned the sweet illusions to whidi 
other spirits axe \\ab\e, and which c^ten 
confer a de^^Vil moi% tnuq^WA, vcA t<Q^ 



THB ITALIAN. 119 

less innoctnt, than any which deUbenUi?e senred the guide, "so much the worse, if he 

reason can b^tow. means us anv harm, for he can steal along 

The same thoughtful silence'that had wxapt the rocks behind these thickets, and strike 
him at the beginning of the joiuney he still out upon us before we are aware of him. 
preserved, except when occasionally he asked Or, if he knows the path that runs among 
a question of the guide concerning the way, those old oaks yonder on the left, where 
and received answers too loquacious for his the ground rises, lie has us sure at the turn- 
humour. This loquacity, however, was not ing of the next cliff." 
easily repiessed, and the peasant had already " Speak lower," said Schedoni, " unless 
begun to relate some terrible stories of murder you mean that he should benefit by your in- 
oommitted in these forests upon people who structions." 

had been haxdy enough to venture into them Though the confessor said this without 

without a guide, before the again abstracted any suspicion of evil intention from the guide, 

Schedoni even noticed that bespoke. Though the man immediately began t%justify himself, 

Ellena did not give much credit to these nar- and added, "I'll give him a hint of what he 

ratives, they had some effect upon her fears may expect, however, if he attacks ui." As he 

when, soon after, she entered the deep shades spoke be fired his trombone in the air, when 

of a part of the forest that lay along a nar- every rock reverberated the sound, and the 

row defile, whence every glimpse of cheerful faint and fainter thunder retired in murmurs 

landscape was again excluded by precipices through all the windings of the defile. ITie 

whidi towered on either side. The stillness eagerness with which the guide had justified 

was not less effectual than the gloom, for no himself produced an effect upon Schedoni 

sounds were heard, except such as seemed to contrary to what he designed : and the con- 

cbaiacterise solitude, and impress its awful fessor. as he watched him suspiciously, ob- 

power more deeply on the heart — the h^ow served that, after he had fired, he did not load 

dashing of torrents descending distantly, and his piece again. " Since you have given the 

the deep sigbings of the wind, as it passed enemy sufficient intimation where to find us." 

among trees which threw their broad arms said Schedoni, "you will do well to prepare 

tmx the cliffis and crowned the highest sum- for his reception ; load Hgain, friend. I. too, 

mits. Onward through the narrowing wind- have arms, and they are ready." 

ings of the defile, no living object appeared ; While the man sullenly obeyed. Eilfna, 

but, as Ellena looked fearfully back, she again alarmed, looked bade in search of the 

thought she distinguished a human figure ad- stranger, but not any person appeared be- 

vancing beneath the dusky umbrage that neath the gloom, and no footstep broke upon 

closed the view. She commimicated her sus- the stillness. When, however, she suddenly 

I^cion to Schedoni, though not her fears, and heard a rustling noise, she looked to the 

th^ stopped for a moment to observe further, bordering thickets, almost expecting to see 

The object advanced slowly, and they per- Spalatro break from among them, before she 

c^ved the stature of a man, who, having con- perceived that it was only the soimding 

tinned to approach, suddenly paused, and pinions of birds, which, startled by the 

then glided away behind the foliage that report of the trombone from their high nests 

crossed the perspective, but not before Ellena in the cliffs, winged their way from danger, 

fancied she discriminated the figure of Spala- The suspicions of the confessor had, pro- 

tro. None but a purpose the most desperate, bably, been slight, for they were transient ; 

she believed, could have urged him to follow and when Ellena next addressed him, he had 

into this pass, instead of returning, as he had again retired within himself. He was rumi- 

pretended, to his home. Yet it appeared im- nating upon an excuse to be offered the 

f4x>bable that he alone should be willing to Marchesa which might be sufficient both 

attack two armed persons, for both Schedoni to assuage her disappointment and baffle her 

and the guide had weapons of defence. This curiosity, and he could not. at present, fabri- 

consideration afforded her only a momentary cate one that might soothe her resentment 

respite from apprehension, since it was pos- without risk of betraying his secret. 

sible that he might not be alone, though only Twilight had added its gloom to that of 

one person had yet been seen among the the rocks before the travellers distinguished 

shrouding branches of the woods. "Did you the town at which they meant to pass the 

not think he resembled Spalatro?" said night. It terminated the defile, and its grey 

£llena to the confessor ; " was he not of the houses could scarcely be discerned from the 

same stature and air ? You are well armed, precipice upon which they himg, or from the 

or I should fear for you as well as for myself. " trees that embosomed them. A rapid stream 

••I did not observe a resemblance," re- rolled below, and over it abridge conducted 

plied Schedoni, throwing a glance back ; the wanderers to the little inn at which they 

••but whosoever he is, you have nothing to were to take up their abode. Here, quietly 

apprehend from him, for he has disap- lodged, Ellena dismissed all present appre- 

peared." bensionof Spalatro, but she still believed she 

"Yes, signor, so much the worse," ob- had seen him, and her sus^vcvoxvst «Sk\!:^>^^ 



190 



THE ITAUAN. 



motive of his extraordinary journey were not 
appeased. 

As this was a town of ampler accommo- 
dation than the one they had left, Schedoni 
easily procured a lay habit that would dis- 
gu se him for the remainder of the journey, 
and EUena was permitted to lay aside the 
nan's veil for one of a more general fashion ; 
but, in thus dismissing it, she did not forget 
that it had been the veil of Olivia, and she 
preserved it as a sacred relic of her favourite 
recluse. 

I'he distance between this town and Naples 
was still that of several days'joumey according 
to the usual mode of travelling ; but the most 
dangerous part of the way was now overcome, 
the road having emeiged from the fcxests ; 
and when Sch^oni. on the following morn- 
ing, was departing, he would have discharged 
the guide, had not the host assured him he 
would find one still necessary in tlM open, but 
wild, country through which he must pass. 
Schedoni 's distrust of this guide had never 
been very serious, and, as the result of the 
preceding evening proved favourable, he had 
restored nim so entirely to his confidence as 
willini^ly to engage him for the present day. 
In this confidence, however, Ellena did not 
perfectly coincide. She had observed the 
man while he loaded the trombone on Sche- 
doni's order, and his evident rductance had 
almost persuaded her that he was in league 
with some person who designed to attack 
them ; a conjecture, perhaps, the most readily 
admitted while her mind was suffering fron 
the impression of having seen Spalatro. She 
now ventured to hint her distrust to the con- 
fessor, who paid little attention to it, and 
reminded her that sufficient proof of the 
man's honesty had appeared in then: having 
been permitted to pass in safety a defile so 
convenient for the purpose of rapine as that 
of yesterday. To a reply apparently so 
reasonable, Ellena could oppose nothing, 
had she even dared to press the topic ; and 
she recommenced the journey with gayer 
hopes. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

ON this day Schedoni was more communi- 
cative than on the preceding one. While 
they rode apart from the guide, he conversed 
with Ellena on various topics relative to her- 
self, but without once alluding to Vivaldi, 
and even condescended to mention his design 
of disposing of her in a convent at some dis- 
tance from Naples till it should be con- 
venient for him to acknowledge her for his 
daughter. But the difficulty of finding a 
suitable situation embarrassed him, and he 
was disconcerted by the awkwardness of 
introducing her himself to strangers, whose 
curiosity wovHd be heijghtened by a sense of 
ihtir interesL 



These coBtklaitkiiig induoedhim the more 
easily to attood to the distress of EUena. qa 
her leeming that she was again to be placed 
at a distance from her hcxne, and among 
strangers ; and the more willingly to Ikten to 
the account she gave of the Convent ddla 
Pieta, and to her reqtiest of returning Uiither. 
But in whatever degree he might be inddned 
to approve, he listened without consendngi 
and Ellena had only the obosolation of per- 
ceiving that he was not absolutdy detennined 
to ad(^ his fiist plan. 

Her thotights were too deeply engaged upon 
her future prospects to permit leisure for pre- 
sent fears, or probably she would have vaS^ 
fered some retiurn of those of ycsterdmr fat 
traversing the lonely plains and rude vaUegra 
through which the road lay. Schedoni was 
thankful to the landlord who had advised 
him to keep the guide, the road being fre- 
quently obscured amongst the wiki heaths 
that stretched around, and Use eye often 
sweeping over long tracts of ooontry withoot 
perceiving a village or any human dwelUngi 
During the whole morning they had not met 
one traveller, and they continued to proceed 
beneath the heat of noon, because Schedoni 
had been tmable to discover even a cottage 
in which shelter and repose m^gfat be oo- 
tahied. 

It was late in the day when the guUe 
pointed out the grey walls of an edifice wfaieh 
crowned the acdivity th«r were approaddi^ 
But this was so shrouded among woods that 
no feature of it could be distim^y sein, and 
it did but slighdy awaken their hopoi of dl** 
covering a convent which might receive tbem 
with hospitality. 

The high banks, overshadowed with tfaickets. 
between which the road ascended, soon ex- 
cluded even a glimpse of the waUs ; but, ai 
the travellers turned the next projection, thev 
perceived a person on the summit of the road, 
crossing as if towards some place of resi- 
dence, and concluded that the edifice they 
had seen was behind the trees among iriiich 
he had disappeared. 

A few moments brought them to the spot, 
where, retired at a short distance amcmg the 
woods that browed the hill, they obsenred 
the extensive remains of what seemed to have 
been a villa, and which, from the air of deso- 
lation it exhibited. Schedoni would have 
judged to be wholly deserted, had he not 
already seen a person enter. Wearied and 
exhausted, he determined to ascertain whe- 
ther any refreshment could be procnred firom 
the inhabitants within, and the party alighted 
before the portal of a deep and broad avemie 
of arched stone, which seemed to have been 
the grand approach to the villa. Over this 
majestic portal rose the light boles and tall 
heads of aloes ; while the Indian fig threw its 
broad leaves in many a luxuriant cluster 
among the capitals ^cn^ ivdi omaments below. 



THB ITALIAN. 



lai 



The entrance was obstnicted by fragments of 
columns, and br the underwood that nad taken 
root amongst them. The travellers, however, 
easily overeune these interruptions ; bat, as 
the avenue was of considerable extent, and as 
its only light prooeeded from the portal, except 
what a few narrow loops in the walls admitted, 
they soon found themselves involved in an 
obscurity that rendered the way difficult, and 
Schedoni endeavoured to make himself heard 
by ^e person he had seen. The effort was 
unsuccessful, but, as they proceeded, a bend 
in the passage showed a distant glimmering 
of light, whKh served to guide them to the 
opposite entrance, where an arch opened im- 
mectiately into a court of the villa. Schedoni 
paused here in disappointment, for every 
object seemed to bear evidence of abandon- 
ment and desolation ; and he looked, almost 
hopelessly, round the Ught colonnade which 
ran along three sides of the court, and to the 
palmelosthat waved over the fourth, in search 
of the person who had been seen from the 
road. No human figure stole upon the 
vacanqr-; yet the apt rears of Ellena almost 
imaged the Ibrm of Spalatro gliding behind 
the oolnmns, and she started as the air shook 
<yver the wild plants that wreathed them, be- 
fore she discovered that it was not the sound 
off steps. At the extravagance of her suspi- 
cioiis> however, and the weakness of her ter- 
rorSf she Unshed, and endeavoured to resist 
that propensity to fear which nerves long 
pressed upon had occasioned in her mind. 

Schedoni meanwhile stood in the court like 
the evil spirit of the place, examining its 
desolation, and endeavouring to ascertain 
whether any person lurked in the interior of 
the building. Several doorways in the colon- 
nade appened to lead to chambers of the villa, 
and, after a short hesitation, Schedoni, having 
determined to pursue his inquiry, entered one 
of them, and passed through a marble hall to 
a suite of rooms whose condition told how 
\aag it was since they had been inhabited. 
The roofs had entirely vanished, and even 
portions of the walls had fallen, and lay in 
masses amongst the woods without. 

Perceiving that it was as useless as difficult 
to pr oceed, the confessor returned to the court, 
where the shade of the palmetos at least 
ofiered a hosintable shelter to the wearied 
travellers. They reposed themselves beneath 
the towering branches on some fragments of 
a marble fountain, whence the court opened 
to the extensive landscape, now mellowed by 
the evening beams, and partook of the remains 
of a repast which had been deposited in the 
vin^et of the guide. 

"This place appears to have suffered from 
an earthquake, rather than from time," said 
Schedoni, " for the walls, though shattered, 
do not seem to have decayed, and much that 
has been strong lies in ruin, while what is 
•ompamthrdy uight remains uninjured ; these 



are certainly symptoms of partial shocks of 
the earth. Do you know anything of the 
history of this place, friend? " 

'* Yes, signor," rmlied the guide. 

'*Rdateit, then.'' 

" I shall never forget the earthquake that 
destroyed it, s'gnor, for it was felt all through 
the Garganuf. I was then about sixteen, 
and I remember it was near an hour before 
midnight that the great shock was felt. The 
weather had been almost stifling for several 
days, scarcely a breath of air had stirred, and 
slight tremblings of the ground were noticed 
by many people. I had been out all day, 
cutting wood in the forest with my father, and 
tired enough we were, when " 

" This is the history of yourself," said Sche- 
doni, interrupting him. " Who did this place 
bek>ng to ? " 

" Did any person suffer here ? " asked 
EUena. 

*'The Bardne di Cambmsca lived here," 
replied the guide. 

"Hahl theBar6ne!" repeated Schedoni. 
and sank into one of his customary fits of 
abstraction. 

" He was a signor little loved in the coun- 
try," continued Oie guide, "and some people 
said it was a judgment upon him for " 

"Was it not rather a judgment upon the 
country?" interrupted the confessor, lifting up 
his head, and then sinking again into silence. 

" I know not for that, signor, but he had 
committed crimes enough to make one's hair 
stand on end. It was here that he •— ^ " 

*' Fools are always wondering at the actions 
of those above them." said Schedoni, testily. 
" Where is the Ban&ne now ? " 

''I cannot tell, signor. but most likely 
where he deserves to be, for he has never been 
heard of since the night of the eanhquake, 
and it is believed he was buried under the 
ruins." 

"Did any other person sufier?" repeated 
Ellena. 

' ' You shall hear, signora, " replied the pea- 
sant. "I happen to know something about 
the matter, because a cousin of ours lived in 
the family at the time, and my father has 
often told me all about it, as well as of the 
late lord's goings-on. It was near midnight 
when the great shock came, and the family, 
thinking of nothing at all, had supped and 
been asleep some time. Now it happened 
that the Bar6ne's chamber was in the tower 
of the old building, at which people often 
wondered, because, said they, why should he 
dioose to sleep in the old part when there 
are so many fine rooms in the new villa?— 
but so it was." 

**Come, despatch your meal," said Sche- 
doni, awaking from his deep musing ; "the 
sun is setting, and we have yet far to go. " 

" I will finish the meal and the stot^ l<^ 
gether, signer, ^tZd 'vo\ks ^sfea.^«^ iv^^^^s^'Oba 



xa2 



THB ITAUAN. 



guide. Schedoni did not notice what he 
said, and as the man was not fofbidden, he 
proceeded with his rdation. 

*'Now ir happened that the Bardne's 
chamber was in that old tower-«if yon will 
look this way, signoiB, you will see what is 
left of it." 

Ellena turned her attention to where the 
guide pointed, and perceived the shattered 
remains of a tower rising beyond the arch 
through which she had entered the court. 

*' You see that comer of a window-case left 
in the highest part of the wall, signora," con- 
tinued the guide ; *' just by that fig-tree, which 
grows out of the stone?" 

" I observe," said Ellena. 

" Well, that vras one of the windows of the 
very chamber, signora. and, you see, scarcely 
anything dse is left of it. Yes, there is the 
door-case, too, but the door itself Ls gone ; 
that little staircase that you see beyond it led 
up to another story, which nobody now would 
guess had ever been ; for roof, and flooring, 
and all are fallen. I wonder how that little 
staircase in the comer happened to hold so 
fast ! " 

'* Have yon almost done? " inquired Sche^ 
doni, who had not apparently attended to 
anything the man said, and now alluded to 
the refreshment he was taking. 

" Yes, signer, I have not a great deal more 
to tell, or to eat either, for that matter," re- 
plied the guide ; " but you shall hear. Well, 
yonder was the very chamber, signora; at 
that door- case, which is still in the wall, the 
BanSne came in. Ah ! he little thought, I 
warrant, that he should never more go out at 
it ! How long he had been in the room I do 
not know, nor whether he was asleep or 
awake, for there is nobody that can tell ; but 
when the great shock came, it ^lit the old 
tower at once, before any other part of the 
buildings. You see that heap of ruins, 
yonder, on the ground, signora; there lie the 
remains of the chamber ; the BanSne, they 
say, was buried under them ! " 

Ellena shuddered while she gazed upon 
this destmctive mass. A groan from Sche- 
doni startled her, and she turned towards 
him, but, as he appeared shrouded in medi- 
tation, she again directed her attention to 
this awful memorial. As her eye passed 
upon the neighbouring arch, she was stmck 
with the grandeur of its proportions, and 
with its singular appearance, now that the 
evening rays glanced upon the overhanging 
shrubs, and darted a line of partial Ught 
athwart the avenue beyond. But what was 
her emotion when she perceived a person 
gliding away in the perspective of the avenue, 
and, as he crossed where the gleam fell, dis- 
fi;7jvished the figtire and countenance of 
SpaJatro ! She had scarcely power faintly to 
excldim, "Steps go there I " before he had 
disappeared; and when Schedoni looked 



round the vacuitv and silenoe of tolitpda 
everywhere pravaiiiBda 

EUena now did not acniple iKMltiv^ to 
affirm that she had wen SpfiattD,.a&d Skhe- 
doni, fully sensible that, u her Imagination 
had not dieluded her, the purpose of Us tfans 
tracing their route must be desperate, immn- 
diately rose, and, followed by the peasant, 
pass^ into the avenue to ascertain the tiuth. 
leaving EUena alone in the court. He had 
scarcdy disappeared b^re the danger off 
his adventuring into tfiat obscure passage^ 
where an assassin might strike nn»mmtt_ 
forcilily occuired to Eltena, and she loudly 
conjured him to return. She listened tor am 
voice, but heard only his retreating steps ; 
when, too anxious to remain .where aba was^ 
she hastened to the entrance of the avenue. 
But all was now hushed ; neither voioa nor 
steps were distinguished. Awed by tiw 
gloom of the place, she feared to ven t uw 
further, yet almost equally dreaded to va-- 
main alone in any part of the rain, vbile a 
man so desperate as Spalatro was hovering 
about it. 

As she yet listened at the entrsnee of the 
avenue, a faint cry, whidi seeo^ to issue 
from the interior of the villa, readied her. 
The first dreadful surmise that strock ICUena 
was that they were murdering her &thsr, 
who had probably been decoyed by ^nothfT 
passage back into some cmunber of the 
min : when, instantly forgetting eveiyfiBar for 
herself, she hastened towards the spot whence- 
she judged the sound to have issued. She 
entered the hall which Schedoni had noticed* 
and passed on through a suite of i^iartmeott. 
beyond. Everything here, however; was / 
silent, and the place apparendy deserted. 
The suite terminated in a passage that ffmwl 
to lead to a distant part df the villa, and 
Ellena, after a momentary hesitatioa, deter- 
mined to follow it 

She made her way with difficulty between 
the half-demolished walls, and was oU^^ 
to attend so much to her «tsps that she 
scarcely noticed whither she was gc^ng, till, 
the deepening shade of the place reciJling 
her attention, she perceived nerself amcmg 
the ruins of the tower whose history had 
been related by the guide ; and, on looldng 
up, observed she was at the foot of the stair- 
case which still wound up the wail that had 
led to the chamber of the Bardne. 

At a moment less anxious the droomstanoe 
would have affected her ; but now she could 
only repeat her calls upon the name of 
S hedoni, and listen for some signal that he 
was near. Still receiving no answer, nor hear- 
ing any further sound of distress, she b^an 
to hope that her fears bad deceived her, and 
having ascertained that the passage terminated 
here, she qoiUeA xVie s^ot. 

On regaimnig ^« tcnX <^:kaxc^o«« 'E2&«tA. 
rested ioi a mwneox xo x^ccmstYfc^sOOti \ «xA« 



THE ITAUAN, 



"3 



While she leaned upon what had once been a 
window opening to the court, she heard 
a distant report of firearms. The sound 
swelled, and seemed to revolve along the 
avenue through which Schcdoni had dis- 
appeared. Supposing that the combatants 
were engaged at the furthest entrance, Ellena 
was preparing to go thither, when a sudden 
step moved near her, and, on turning, she 
discovered, with a degree of horror that 
almost deprived her of recollection, Spalatro 
himself stealing along the very chamber in 
which she was. 

That part cKf the room which she stood in, 
fell into a kind of recess ; and whether it was 
this drcnmstance that prevented him from 
immediately perceiving her, or that, his chief 
parpose beingdirectecragainst another object, 
he did not choose to pause here, he passf^l on 
with skulking steps ; and, brfore Ellena had 
determined whether to go, she observed him 
cross the court before her. and enter the 
avenue. As he passed he looked up at the 
window : and it was certain he then saw her, 
for he instantly faltered, but in the next 
moment proceeded swiftly, and disappeared 
in the gloom. 

It seemed that he had not yet encountered 
Schedoni, but it also occurred to Ellena that 
he was gone into the avenue for the purpose 
of awaiting to assassinate him in the dark- 
ness. "While she was mcxiitating some means 
of giving the confessor a timely alarm of his 
danger, she once more distinguished his voice. 
It approached from the avenue, and Ellena, 
immediately calling aloud that Spalatro was 
there, entreated him to be on his guard. In 
the next instant a pistol was fired there. 

Among the voices that succeeded the report 
£Uena thought she distinguished groans. 
Schedoni's voice was in the next moment 
heard again, but it seemed faint and low. 
The courage which she had before exerted 
was now exhausted ; she remained fixed to 
the spot, unable to encoimter the dreadful 
spectacle that probably awaited her in the 
avenue, and almost sinking beneath the ex- 
pectation of it. 

All was now hushed ; she listened for 
Schedoni's voice, and even for a footstep — in 
vain. To endure this state of uncertainty 
much longer was scarcely possible, and Ellena 
was endeavouring to collect fortitude to meet 
a knowledge of the worst, when suddenly a 
feeble groaning was again heard. It seemed 
near, and to t^ approaching still nearer. At 
that moment, Ellena, on looking towards the 
avenue, perceived a figure, covered with blood, 
pass into the court. A film which drew over 
ncr eyes prevented her noticing further. She 
tottered a few paces back, and caught at the 
fragment of a pillar, by which she supported 
herself. The weakness was, however, tran- 
sient; inmiediate assistance appeared ne- 
cessary to the wounded person, and pity soon 



predominating over horror, she recalled her 
spirits, and hastened to the court. 

When, on reaching it. she looked round in 
search of Schedoni, he was nowhere to be 
seen ; the court was again solitary and silent, 
till she awakened all its echoes with the name 
oi father. While she re|)eaied her calls, she 
hastilv examined the colonnade, tlie separated 
chamber which opcnr^ immediately from it, 
and the shadowy ground beneath thepalmetos. 
but without discovering any person. 

As she turned towards the avenue, how* 
ever, a track of blood on the ground told 
her too certainly where the wounded person 
had passed. It guided her to the entrance of 
a narrow passage that set-mingly led to the 
foot of the tower : but here she hesitated, 
fearing to trust the obscurity beyond. For 
the first time Ellena conjectured that not 
Sdiedoni, but Spalatro. might be the person 
she had seen, and that, though he was 
wounded, vengeance might give him strength 
to strike his stiletto at the heart oi whomso- 
ever approached him, while the duskiness of 
the place would favour the deed. 

She was yet at the entrance of the passage, 
fearful to enter, and reluctant to Uave it, 
listening for a sound, and still hearing at 
inteivab swelling though feeble groans, when 
quick steps were suddenly heard advancing 
up the grand avenue, and presently her 
own name was repeated loudly in the voice 
of Schedoni. His niwnner was huiried as 
he advanced to meet her. and he threw an 
eager glance round thw court. "We must 
be gone." said he. in a low tone, and taking 
her arm within his. " Have you seen anyone 
pass?" 

" I have seen a wounded man enter the 
court," " replied Elltna, "and feared he was 
yourself." 

"Where?— Which way did he go?" in- 
quired Schedoni, eagerly, while his eyes 
glowed, and his countenance became fell. 

Ellena, instantly comprehending his motive 
for the question, would not acknowledge that 
she knew whither Spalatro had withdrawn ; 
and, reminding him of the danger of their 
situation, she entreated that they might quit 
the villa immediately. 

" The sun is already set," she added. " I 
tremble at what may be the perils of this 
place at such an obscure hour, and even at 
what may be these of our road at a later 1 " 

•'You are sure he was wounded?" said 
the confessor. 

•• Too sure," replied Ellena, faintly. 

" Too sure I " sternly exclaimed Schedoni. 

*• Let us depart, my father ; oh, let us go 
this instant I" repeated Ellena- 

" What is the meaning of all this ? asked 
Schedoni, with anger. * * You cannot, surely, 
have the weakness to pity this fellow ! " 

•* It is terrible to see anyone »sS« " ?a2A 
Ellena. • ' Do uox, \s% itsBaiwri^ \«?cfc, Va."*^ 



1^4 THE ITALIAN, 

me a possibility of grieving for you. What she could not know that any human being 
anguish it would occasion you to see me was left under such drcnmstanoes of mffering 
blMd; judge, then, what must be mine, if and solitude without experiencing veiyjpaiiiiul 
yon are wounded by the dagger of an emotion ; but, considering bow expedidoady 
assassin ." Spalatro had been able to remove himtfttf, ibe 

Schedcni stifled the groan which swelled endeavoured to hope that his woond wu not 
from his heart, and abruptly tiurned away. mortal. 

"You trifle with me," be said, in the next The travellers, mounting thdr honei in 
moment. " You do not know that the villain silence, left the ruin, and were for some time 
is wounded. I fired at him, it is true, at the too much engaged by the impresskm of the 
instant I saw him enter the avenue, but he late occurrences to converse together. When, 
has escaped me. What reason have you for at length. Ellena inquired the particulfun itf 
your supposition ? ' ' what had passed in the avenue^ she undentood 

EUcna was going to point to the track of that Schedoni, on pursuing SpakOzo, had 
blood on the ground at a little distance, but seen him there only for a momenL SpAhtro 
restrained her^f, considering that this might had escaped by some way unknown to the 
guide him on to Spalatro ; and again she confessor, and had regafaied the interior of 
entreated they might depart, adding, *' Oh 1 the ruin while his pursuers were yetfbtknring 
spare yourself, and him ! " the avenue. The cry which EOena had inur 

*' What 1 spare an assassin ! " said Sche- gined to proceed from the interior wai uttered, 
doni, impatiently. as it now appeared, by the gnide^ wbo^ in his 

"An assassin I He has, then, attempted haste, had fallen over some fragments of tha 
yoiu: life ? " exclaimed Ellena. wall that lay scattered in the avenue. The 

" Why, no. not absolutely that." replied first report of arms had been from the bom- 
Schedoni. recollecting himself. " but — what bone, which Schedoni had discharged on 
docs the fellow do here ? Let me pass ; I will reaching the ponal ; and the last when he 
find him." fired a pistol, on perceiving Spalatro pasdng 

Ellena still hung upon his garment, while, from the court, 
wi h persuasive tenderness, she endeavoured " We have had. trouble enough in running 
to awaken his humanity. " Oh ! if )ou had after this fellow," said the guide, "and could 
ever known what it was to exp>ect instant not catch him at last. It is strange that, if 
death," she continued. " you would pity this he c^me to look for us. he should run away 
m m now, as he, perhaps, has sometimes so when he had found us ! I do not think he 
I^i'ied others 1 I have known such suffering, meant us any harm after all, else he might 
my father, and can, therefore, feel even for have done it easily enough in the daik pas- 
hini." sage ; instead whereof 1m only took to his 

"Do you know for whom you are pleading?" heels ! " 
said the distracted Schedoni, while every word " Silence I " said Schedoni ; " fewer words, 
she had uttered seemed to have penetrated his friend." 

heart. The surprise which this question "W^ell, s'gnor. he's peppered nnw, how^ 
awakened in EUena's countenance recalled ever ; so we need not be aunud. His wings 
him to a consciousnnss of his imprudence ; are clipped for one while, so he cannot over- 
he recollected that Ellena did not certainly take us. We need not be in such a huny, 
know the office with which Spalatro had been signor ; we shall get to the inn in good time 
commissioned against her : and when he con- yet. It is upon a mountain yonder, whose 
sideied that this very Spalatro, whom Ellena top you may see upon that red streak in the 
had with such simplicity supposed to have, at west. He cannot come after us ; I myself 
some time, spared a life through pity, had in saw his arm was wounded." 
truth spared her own, and, yet more, had "Did you so?" said Sdiedoni, sharply; 
been eventually a means of preventing him " and pray where were you when you saw se 
from destroying his own child, the confessor much ? It was more than I saw." 
turned in horror from his design ; all his "I was close at your heels, dgnor, wlien 
p^^ssions changed, and he abruptly quitted the you fired the pistol" 

Court, nor paused till he reached the furthest " I do not remember to have heard you 
extremity of the avenue, where the guide was there," observed the confessor; "and why 
in waiting with the horses. did not you come forward, instoul of retreat- 

A recollection of the conduct of Spalatro ing? And where, also, did you hide yoiuself 

respecting Ellena had thus induced Schedoni while I was searching for the fellow, instead 

to spare him : but this was all ; it did not of assisting me in the piu^uit?" 

prevail with liim to inquire into the condition The guide gave no answer, and EUena, who 

of this man, or to mitigate his punishment ; had been attentively observing liim during the 

and, without remorse, he now left him to liis whole of this conversation, perceived tliat he 

^(f; Waft now considerably embarrassed ; so that 

W/ili Ellena It was of herwlse. Though she her fotmet iM«p\cioiA sa \n\i&aVtt««jE>!i| begian 

9tnwj(gaanuu ^tbm QbUgt^tiwa aht owed him, to cevivei UQlCNlOQA\iiad^^3MiMnxsi^ifl^^ 



The ITALIAN, 



"S 



itances wbich bad occurred to render them 
ImprolMbie. There was, however, at present 
no oppommi^ for further observation, Schts 
doni navuig, contrary to the advice of the 
£tiide^ inunediatd^ quickened his pace, and 
the hones continuing on the full gallop till a 
Sleep ascent compelled them to releuc their 
speeQ* 

Cootraxy to his usual habit, Schedoni now, 
while they slowly ascended, appeared desirous 
€»r oonversfne with Uiis man. and asked him 
aeveml questions relative to the villa they had 
left ; and whether it was that he really felt 
an hitereU on the subject or that he wished 
to diaoover if the man had deceived him in 
the dreumsfances he had already narrated, 
ftom which he might form a judgment as to 
his general diaracter, he pressed his inquiries 
with a patient minuteness that somewhat 
smprised EUena. During this conversation, 
the deep twilic^t would no longer permit her 
tb notice the countenance of either Schedoni 
or the guide ; but she gave much attention to 
the dianging tones of their voices, as different 
circumstances and emotions seemed to affect 
them. It is to be observed that during the 
whole of this discourse the guide rode at the 
iride of Schedoni. 

While the confessor appeared to be musing 
tqx>n something which the peasant had re- 
lated respecting the Bardne di Cambrusca, 
EUena inquired as to the fate of the other 
inhabitants of the villa. 

** The falling of the old tower was enough 
for them," replied the guide; "the crash 
waked them all directly, and they had time to 
get out of the new buildings before the 
second and third shocks laid them also in 
ruins. They ran out into the woods for 
saliety, and found it too, for they happened to 
-iake a different road from the earthquake. 
Not a soul suffered except the Barone, and 
he deserved it well enough. Ob ! I could tell 
sodi things that I have heard of him " 

•• What became of the rest of the family ? ** 
hiterrupted Schedoni. 

"Why, signer, they were scattered here 
and there and everywhere ; and they none of 
them ever returned to the old spot. No ! no 1 
they had suffered enough there already, and 
might have suffered to this day, if the earth- 
quake had not happened." 

•■If it had not happened ? " repeated 
EUena. 

"Aye, signora, for that put an end to the 
Bar6ne. If those walls could but speak, they 
could tell strange things, for they have looked 
npon sad doings ; and that chamber which 
I showed you, signora, nobody ever went into 
it but himself, except the servant to keep it 
in order, and that he would scarcely suffer 
and always stayed in the room the while." 

• ■ Me had probably treasure stcreted there» " 
obtervad Sifeoa* 

•'No, tigaoM, to tnoiunl H« bad 



always a lamp burning there, and sometimes 
in the night he has beat heard — once, indeed, 
his valet happened to " 

"Come on," said Schedoni. interrupting 
him ; ' ' keep pace with me. What idle dream 
are you relating now ? " 

"It is about the Bardne di Cambrusca, 
sigiior/' replied the guide, raising his voice ; 
" him that you were asking nie so much about 
just now. I was saying what strange ways 
he had, and how that on one stormy night in 
December, as my cousin Francisca told my 
father, who told me, and he lived in the family 
at the time it happened " 

" What happened ? " said Schedoni, hastilv. 

"What I am going to tell, signer. My 
cousin lived there at the time ; so, however 
unbelievable it may seem, you may depend 
upon it, it is all true. My father knows I 
would not believe it myself till " 

" Enough of this," said Schedoni ; " no 
more. What family had this Bardnej-had 
he a wife at the time of this destructive 
shock ? " 

"Yes, truly, signor, he had, as I was going 
to tell if you would but condescend to have 
patience. ' 

"The Bardne had more need of that, 
friend. I have no wife." 

"The Bardne's wife had most need of it, 
S'gnor, as you shall hear. A good soul, they 
say. was the Baronessa ; but luckily she died 
many years before. He had a daughter also, 
and. young as she was. she had lived too 
long but for the earthquake, which set her 
free." 

" How far is it to the inn ? " said the con- 
fessor, roughly. 

" When we get to the top of this hill, si- 
gnor, you will see it on the next if any light 
is stirring, for there will only be the hollow 
between us. But do not be frightened, signor, 
the fellow we left cannot overtake us. Do 
you know much about him, signor? " 

Schedoni inquired whether the trombone 
was charged, and, discovering that it was not, 
ordered the man to load immediately. 

"Why, signor, if you knew as much of 
him as I do you could not be more afraid I " 
said (he peasant, while he stopped to obey the 
order. 

" I understood that he was a stranger to 
you ! " observed the confessor, with surprise. 

" Why, signor, he is and he is not ; I know 
more about him than he thinks for." 

" You seem to know a vast deal too much 
of other persons' affairs. " said Schedoni, in a 
tone that was meant to silence him. 

"Why, that is just what he would say, 
signor; but bad deeds will out, whethef 
people like them to be known or not. This 
man comes to our towIL&ocafiXitcv«&Xc^Tcc^:c^<^^^ 
and nobody knew viVkci^ Yi<^ ^^xoAltc^xcw Vic ^ 
long while; m \hei^ cft\ >^«GBARiC(Vk\A'«^'^^ 
Mi4 toUBd i\ «\iX li\\aii^'' 



za6 



THE iTAUAN. 



'* We shall never reach thd summit of this 
hiU," said Schcdoni, testily. 

"And they found out, too, a great many 
strange things about liim," continued the 
>2^uide. 

EUena, who had attended to this discourse 
with a degree of curiosity that was painful, 
now listened impatiently for what might be 
further mentioned concerning Spalatro, but 
without daring to invite, by a single question, 
any discovery on a subject which appeared to 
be so intimately connected with Schedoni. 

" It was many years ago," rejoined the 
guide, " that this man came to hve in that 
strange house on the sea-shore. It had been 
shut up ever since— " 

"What are you talking of now?" inter- 
rupted the confessor, sharply. 

*• Wliy, s'gnor, you never will let me tell 
you. You always snap me up so short at 
the beginning, and then ask what I am talk- 
ing about 1 I was going to begin the story, 
and it is a pretty long one. But first of all, 
signor, who do you suppose this man be- 
longed to? And what do you think the 
people determined to do when ihc report was 
first set a-going ? only they could not be sure 
it was true, and anybody would be unwilling 
enough to believe such a shocking " 

"I have no curiosity on th*? subject," re- 
plied the confessor sternly interrupting him, 
"and desire to hear no more concerning it." 

" I meant no harm, signor," said the man ; 
" I did not know it concerned you." 

" And who says that it does concern 
me?" 

" Nobody, signor, only you seemed to be 

in a bit of a passion, and so I thought 

But I meant no harm, signor ; only, as he 
happened to be your guide part of the way, 
I guessed you might like to know something 
of him." 

" All that I desire to know of my guide is 
that he does his duty," replied .Schcdoni, 
"that hf conducts me safely, and under- 
stands when to be silent." 

To this the man replied nothing, but slack- 
ened his pace, and slunk behind his reprover. 

The travellers, reaching soon after ihe 
summit of this long hill, looked out for the 
inn of which they had been told ; but dark- 
ness now confounded every object, and no 
domestic light tv^inkling, however distantly, 
through the gloom gave signal of security 
and comfort. They descended dijectedly 
into the hollow of the mountains, and found 
themselves once more immergcd in woods. 
Schedoni again called the peasant to his side, 
and bade him keep abreast of him ; but he 
did not discourse, and EUena was too thought- 
ful to attempt conversation. The hints which 
the guide had thrown out respecting Spalatro 
had increased her curiosity on that subject ; 
but the conduct of Schedoni, his impatience, 
Iiig embarrassmeBt, smd the decisive manner 



in which he had put an end to the talk o^ tbe 
peasant, excited a degree of surprise that 
bordered on astonishment As she had, 
however, no due to lead her conjectunss to 
any point, she was utterly bewfld^«d in sur- 
mise, imderstanding only that Schedoni bad 
been much more deeply connected with 
Spalatro than she had hitherto beUeved. 

The travellers, having descended into tha 
hollow, and commence the ascent of the 
opposite height, without discovering any 
symptoms of a neighbouring town. Degaa 
again to fear that their conductor had de- 
ceived them. It was now so dark that the 
road, though the soil was a limestone, could 
scarcely be disoomed, the woods on either 
side forming a "close dungeon of innnmer- 
able boughs, " that totally excluded the twi- 
light of the stars. 

While the confessor was qnestionfag the 
man with some severity, a faint idiouting was 
heard from a distance ; and he stopped the 
horses to listen from what quarter it came. 

"That comes the way we are goingi 
signor," said the guide. 

"Harkl" exc^med Schedoni; "those 
are strains of revelry 1 " 

A confused sound of voices, laughter, and 
musical instruments was heard ; smd, as the 
air blew stronger, tambourines and flutes were 
distinguished. 

" Oh ! oh I we are near the end of our 
journey 1 " said the peasant ; "all this comes 
from the town we are going to. But what 
makes them all so merry, I wonder ! " 

Ellena, revived by this inteUjgenoei fol- 
lowed with alacrity the sudden speed of the 
confessor ; and presently reaching a point oi 
the mountain where the woods opened, a 
cluster of lights on another summit, a little 
higher, more certainly annoimced the town. 

They soon after arrived at the ruinous 
gates, which had formerly led to a place of 
some strength, and passed at once from 
darkness and desolated walls into a market- 
place blazing with light and resounding with 
the multitude. Booths, fantastically hung 
with lamps, and filled with merchandise of 
every kind, disposed in the gayest order, 
were spread on all sides, and peasants in 
their holiday clothes, and parties of masks, 
crowded every avenue. Here was a band c^ 
musicians, and there a group of dancers ; on 
one spot the outri humour of a zanni pro- 
voked the never-faihng laugh of an Italian 
rabble ; in another the improvisaton^ by the 
pathos of his story and the persuasive sensi- 
bilitv of his strains, was holding the attention 
of his auditors as in the bands of magic 
Further on was a stage raised for a display of 
fireworks, and near this a theatre, where a 
mimic opera, the "shadow of a shade," was 
exhibiting, whence the roar of laughter, ex- 
cited by the principal buffo within, mingled 
with the heterogeneous voices of the vendors 



THE ITAUAN, 197 

of loe^ macaroni^ sheibet, and diavdoni to look at his tricks. See I he has turned a 

without monk into a devil already, in the twinkling of 

The coofitsor looked upon this scene with an eye 1 " 
diaanpointment and iU-humour, and bade the " Silence 1 and proceed," said Schedoni. 
euioego before him, and show the way to "That is what I say, siKnor. silence 1 for 

tne best inn ; an ofiice which the latter under- the people make such a noise Uiat I cannot 

took with great glee, though he made his way hear a word you speak. Silen .e, there 1 " 
with difitooltj. "To thmk I should not " Conside ing thai you could not hear, you 

know it was the time of the £air 1 " said he ; have answered wonderfully to the purpose, " 

"though, to say truth, I never was at it but said Ellena. 

once in my Ufe, and then I was only three " Ah ! signor, is not this better th^n those 

months old, so it was not so surprising, dark woods and hills? But what Iiave we 

signor." here? I.,ook, signor, here is a fine sigtit I " 

"Make way through the crowd," said Sche- The crowd, which was assembled round a 

doni. stage on which some persons grotesquely 

"Alter jogging on so long in the dark, dr<:ssed were performing, now interrupting 
signor, with nothing at all to be seen," con- all further progress, the travellers were com- 
tinned the man, without attending to the direc- pelled to stop at the foot of the platform. The 
tions " then to come, all of a sudden, to such people above were acting what seemed to 
a place as this, why, it is like coming out of have been intended for a tragedy, but what 
pnrgatofy into paradise. Well, signor, you their strange gestures, uncouth recitation, 
bavQ loigot all your quandaries now ; you and incongruous countenances had trans- 
think nothing now about that old ruinous formed into a comedy. 
place iHiere we had such a race after the man Schedoni. thus obliged to pause, withdrew 
that woold not murder us ; but that shot I his attention from the scene ; Ellena consented 
fired did his business." to endure it, and the peasant, with gaping 

"Yon fired 1 " said Schedoni, aroused by mouth and staring eyes, stood like a statue, 

the assertion. yet not knowing whether he ought to laugh 

"Yes» dgnor, as I was looking over your or cry, till suddenly turning round to the 

shoulder. I should have thought you must confessor, whose horse was of necessity close 

have beard it 1 " to his, he seized his arm, and pointing to 

" I should have thought so too, friend." the stage, called out, "Lookl signor, see t 

"Aye, signor, this fine place has put all signor, what a scoundrel 1 what a villain ! see, 

that out of your head, I warrant, as well as he has murdered his own daughter 1 " 
what I said about that same fellow ; but, in- At these terrible words the indignation of 

deed, signor, I did not know he was related Schedoni was done away by other emotions ; 

to jroa when I talked so of him. But, per- he turned his eyes upon the stage, and per- 

bai», for all that, you may not know the piece ceived that the actors were performing the 

of his Stonr I was going to teU you when you story of Virginia. It was at the moment 

cut me on so short, though you are better when she was dying in the arms of her father, 

acqnaintfd with one another than I guessed who was holding up the poniard with which 

for ; so, when I come in from the fair, signcM:, he had stabbed her. The feelings of Schedoni 

if you please, I ¥dll tell it to you ; and it is a at this instant inflicted a punishment almost 

pretty long history, for I happen to know the worthy of the crime he had meditated. 
whole of it ; though, where you cut me short, Ellena, struck with the action, and with the 

when you ware in one of those quandaries, was contrast which it seemed to offer to what she 

only Just at the beginning, but no matter for believed to have been the late conduct of 

that, I can begin it again, for——" Schedoni towards herself, looked at him with 

"What is all this? " said Schedoni, again most expressive tenderness, and as his glance 

recalled from one of the thoughtful moods met hers she perceived Math surprise the 

in which he had so habitually indulged that changing emotions of his soul and the inex- 

even the bustle around him had failed to in- plicable character of his countenance. Stung 

terrupt the course of his mind. He now bade to the heart, the confessor furiously spurred 

the peasant be silent ; but the man was too his horse that he might escape from the scene, 

happy to be tractable, and proceed to express but the poor animal was too spiritless and 

all he felt as they advanced slowly through jaded to force its way through the crowd ; 

the crowd. Every object here was to him new and the peasant, vexed at being hurried from a 

and delightful; and, nothing doubting that place where, almost for the first time in his life, 

it must h& equally so to every other person, he was suffering under the strange delights 

he was continually pointing out to the proud of artificial grief, aiid half angry to observe 

and gloomy .confessor the trivial subjects of an animal of which he had the cire ill 

his own admiration. "See ! signor, there is ueated, loudly remonstialed, ^.Xi^«>€\i^^ ^<ei 

Punchinello ; see bow he eats £e hot maca- bridle of Schedoni, >N\io, ^\!0i "nxox^mc^tv^A.^, 

roni 1 And look there, signor I there is a was applying the v/Yi\p\.oV\ve^o\i\^«v^oi^^ 

)ag$ler! Ob, good signor, stop one minute guide, whca the cxo^^ su^fiAwA-^ i^X^j^w^^ 



X98 



THE ITALIAN, 



opened a way through which the travellers 
passed, aod arrived with little further inter- 
ruption at the door of the inn. 

Sc^edoni vras not in a humour which ren- 
dered him fit to encounter difficulties, and 
still less the vulgar squabbles of a place 
already crowded with guests ; yet it was not 
without much opposition that he at length 
obtained a lodging for the night. The peasant 
was not less anxious for the accommodation 
of his horses; fnd when EUcna heard him 
declare that the animal which the confessor 
had so cruelly spurred should have a double 
feed, and a bed of straw as high as his head, 
if he himself went without one, she gave him, 
unnoticed by Schedoni, the only ducat she 
had left. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

SCHEDONI passed the night without 
sleep. The incident of the preceding 
evening had not only renewed the agonies 
of remorse, but excited those of pride and 
apprehension. There was something in the 
conduct of the peasant towards him which 
he could not clearly understand, though his 
suspicions were sufficient to throw his mind 
into a state of the utmost perturbation. 
Under the air of extreme simplicity, this man 
had talked of Spalatro, had discovered that 
he was acquainted with much of his history, 
and had hinted that he knew by whom he 
had been employed ; yet at the' same time 
appeared unconscious that Schedoni 's was 
the master-hand which had directed the 
principal actions of the ruffian. At other 
times his behaviour had seemed to contradict 
the supposition of his ignorance on this point ; 
from some circumstances he had mentioned 
it appeared impossible but that he must have 
known who Schedoni really was. and even 
his own conduct had occasionally seemed to 
acknowledge this, particularly when, being 
interrupted in his history of Spalatro, he 
attempted an apology, by saying he did not 
know it concerned Schedoni ; nor could the 
conscious Schedoni believe that the very 
pointed manner in which the peasant had 
addressed him at the representation of Vir- 
ginia was merely accidental. He wished to 
dismiss the man immediately, but it was first 
necessary to ascertain what he knew concern- 
ing him, and then to decide on the measures 
to be taken. It was, however, a difficult 
matter to obtain this information without 
manifesting an anxiety which might betray 
him if the guide had, at present, only a 
general suspicion of the truth, and no less 
difficult to determine how to proceed towards 
him if it should be evident that his suspidons 
rested on Spalatro. To take him forward to 
Naples was to bring an informer to his home ; 
to suffer him to return with his discovery, now 
tbmt b9 prvbably kMw tbt pltLcm of Schedoni't 



residence, was little less hazardoms. Ifii 
death only could secure the secret. 

After a night passed in the tumult of snch 
considerations, the confessor summoned tlw 
peasant to his chamber, and, with lome short 
preface, told him he baid no ffiirthet occ ts fcm 
for his services, adding carelessly that iM 
advised him to be on his guard as IM re- 
passed the villa, lest Spalatro, who might yet 
lurk there, should revenge upon him the injury 
he had received. " According to your aoooimt 
of him, he is a very dangerous fellow," added 
Schedoni, " but your information is, pertiaps^ 
erroneous." 

The guide began testily to justify hinidf 
for his assertions, and the confessor then 
deavoured to draw from him what he 
on the subject. But. whether the man 
piqued by the treatment he had hudy 
ceived, or had other reasons for leserve, he 
did not at first appear so willing to oommi- 
nicate as formerly. 

"What you hinted of this man.'* aidd 
Schedoni, " has, in some degree, esdte4 ia^ 
curiosity. I have now a few momenta -of 
leisure, and you may relate, if yon will, soi a a a- 
thing of the wonderful history yon talki^ of.** 

" It is a long story, signor, and yoa wmUd 
be tired before I got to the end of it,*- replied 
the peasant ; " and, craving your panlaB,- 
s'gnor, I don't much like to be snapped np 
so." 

"Where did this man live?" said Ae 
conftssor. "You mentioned someddqg'of 
a house at the seaside." 

"Aye, signor, there is a strange histoiy 
belonging to that house too ; but this man, 
as I was saying, came there all of a snridei^ 
nobody knew how ; and the place had been 
shut up ever since the Marchese — " 

"ThcMarchese!" said Schedoni, toMIjri 
'• what Marchese, friend ? " 

" Why, I mean the BanSne di Cambnnea, 
signor, to be sure, as I was going to have 
told you of my own accord, if you would only 
have let me. Shut up ever since the Baidna 
—I left off there, I think?" 

" I understood that the BanSne wafrdeidk'^ 
observed the confessor. 

" Yes, signor," replied the peasant, fiafaig 
bis eyes on Schedoni; "but what has his 
death to do with what I was telling? This 
happened before he died." 

Schedoni, somewhat disconcerted by thfa 
unexpected remark, forgot to resent the 
familiarity of iL "This man, then — this 
Spalatro — was connected with the Bardne di 
Cambrusca? " said he. 

" It was pretty well guessed so, signor." 

*'How! no more than guessed?" 

"No, signor, and that was more than 
enough for the Bar6ne's liking, I warmnt.- 
He took too much care for anjrthing certain 
to appear against him, and he was wise so co 
d«v for if it had) it would have ' 



TUB ITAUAN. 



129 



for hhn. But I was going to tell you the 
story, signor." 

" What vnsons were there for believing 
this was an agent of the Bar6ae di Cam- 
tmisca. ftfend?" 

" I thought you wUhed to hear the story, 
ngnor.'* 

" In good time ; but, first, what were your 
reasons?** 

'* One of them is enough, signor ; and, if 
you would only have let me gone straight on 
with the stoiy, you would have found it out 
by this time, signor." 

Schedoal frowned, but did not otherwise 
reprove the impertinence of the remarlc 

*' It was reason enough, signor, to my 
ndnd;** continued the peasant, " that it was 
sach a crime as nobody but the Bar6ne di 
Cambnxsca could have committed ; there 
was nobody wicked enough in our parts to 
have done It but him. Why, is not this 
reason enough, signor? What makes you 
1o6k at me so? why, tbe Bar6ne himself 
Goidd hardly have looked worse if I had told 
blm as much." 

"Be less prolix," said the confessor, in a 
mtiaincd voice. 

'* Well then, signor, to begin at the begin- 
ning. It is a good many years ago that 
Mairoo cune first to our town. Now tbe 
atoiy goes, that one stormy night " 

'*You may spare yourself the trouble of 
rdating the story," said Schtdoni, abruptly. 
"Did you ever see the BanSne you were 
speaking of. friend ? " 

"Why did you bid me tell it, sigaor, since 
you knew it already ? I have been here all 
this while, just a-going to begin It, and all for 
noUiing I *' 

" It is very surprising," resumed the artfVil 
Sdiedoni, without having noticed what had 
been said, " that if this Spalatro was known 
to be the villain you say he is, not any step 
should have been taken to bring him to jus- 
tice ; how liappened that? But, perhaps. £dl 
this stoiy was nothing more than a report." 

"Why, signor, it was everybody's business, 
and nobody s, as one may say ; then, besides, 
nobody could prove what they had heard, and 
though everybody believed tbe story just the 
same as if they had seen the whole, yet that, 
they said, would not do in law, but that they 
should be made to prove it. Now it is not 
one time in ten, signor, that anything can be 
proved, signor, as you well know, vet we 
none of us believe it Uie less for that ! ' 

" So, then, you would have had this man 
puDished for a murdeir which, probably, he 
neinor oomofeitted 1 " said the confessor. 

"A onxrder ! " repeated the peasant. 

Schedoni was silent, but in the next instant 
said, " Did you not say it was a murder ? " 

" I have not told you so, signor ! " 

"What was the crime, then?" resumed 
fichsdoiii, bfteir yOlDtber rtiomentaJry l^use ; 



"you said it was atrocious, and what more 
so than— murder?" His lip quivered as he 
pronounced the fast word. 

The peasant made no reply, but remained 
with his eyes fixed upon the confessor, and 
at length repeated. " Did I say it wns murder, 
signor ? " 

" If it was not that, say whnt it was," de- 
manded the confessor, haughtily ; " but let it 
be in two words." 

" As if a story could be told in two words, 
signor ! " 

"WeU, well, be brief." 

" How can I, signor, when the story is so 
long?" 

"I will waste no more time." said Sche- 
doni. going. 

" Well, signor, I will do my best to make 
it short. It was one stormy night in Decem- 
ber that Marcu Torma had been out fishing. 
Marco, signor, was an old man thiit lived in 
our town when I was a boy ; I c^n but just 
rememier him, but my father knew him well 
and loved old Marco, and u»ed often to 
say " 

" To the story ! " said Sch-doni. 

" Why. I am telling it. siirnor, as fast as I 
can. This old Marco did not live in our 
town at the time it hi^ppened. but in some 
place, I have forgot the name of it, near ihe 
sea shore. What can the name be? it is 
something like " 

" Well, what happened to this old dotard?" 

"You are out there, signor, he was no old 
dotard ; but you shall hear. At that time, 
signor, Marco lived in this place that I have 
forgot the name of. and was a fislierman, but 
better times turned up aftcrwai ds, but that is 
neither here nor there. Old Marco had been 
out fishing ; it was a stormy night, and he 
was glad enough to get on 5h'>re, I warrant. 
It was quite dark — as dark, signor, I suppose, 
as it was last night— and he was making the 
best of his way, signor, with some fish along 
the shore, but it bdnp^ so dark he lost h's way 
notwithstanding. The rain beat and the 
wind blew, and he wandered about a long 
while, and could see no light nor hear any- 
thing but the surge near him, which some- 
times seemed as if it was coming to wash him 
away. He got as far off it as he could, but 
he knew there were high rocks over the 
beach, and he was afraid he should run his 
head against them if he went too far, I sup- 
pose. However, at last he went up close to 
uiem, and as he got a little shelter he re- 
solved to tjy no further for the present I 
tell it you, signor, Ulst as my father told it 
me. and he had it u-om the old man himself." 

" You need not be so particular," replied 
the confessor ; "speak to the point." 

"Well, signor, as old Marco lay snug under 
the rocks, he thought he heard somebody com- 
ing, and he lifted up h>s VveaA, \^wc\^\\\, v^ 
old soul I as if he co\i\dYiaNe ieei\ VcvQW^iyi^ 



I30 



THE ITALIAN. 



However, he could hear, though it was so 
dark, and he heard the steps coming on ; but 
he said nothing yet, meaning to let them 
come close up to him before he discovered 
himself. Presently he sees a little moving 
light, and it comes nearer and nearer, till it 
was just opposite to him, and then he saw 
the shadow of a man on the ground, and 
then he spied the man himself, with a dark 
lantern, passing along the beach." 

"Well, well, to the purpose, " said Sche- 
doni. 

" Old Marco, signor, my father says, was 
never stout-hearted, and he took it into his 
head this might be a robber, because he had 
the lantern, though, for that matter he would 
have been glad enough of a lantern himself, 
and so he lay quiet. But, presently, he was 
in a rare fright, for the man stopped to rest 
the load he had upon his back on a rock near 
him, and old Marco saw him throw off a 
heavy sack, and heard him breathe hard, 
as if he was hugely tired. I tell it, signor, 
just as my father does." 

" What was in the sack? " said Schedoni, 
coolly. 

"All in good time, signor; perhaps old 
Marco never found it out ; but you shall hear. 
He was afraid, when he saw the sack, to 
stir a limb, for he thought it held booty. 
But, presently, the man, without saying a 
word , heaved it on his shoulders again, and 
staggered away with it along the beach, and 
Marco saw no more of him." 

"Well! what has he to do with your 
story, then ? " said tlia confessor. • • Was this 
Spalatro?" ; • 

"All in good time, signor ; you put me out. 
When the storm was down a little, Marco 
crept out, and thinking there must be 
a village, or a hamlet, or a cottage at no 
great distance, since this man had passed, he 
thought he would try a little further. He had 
better have stayed where he was, for he wan- 
dered about a long while, and could see no- 
thing, and what was worse, the 'Storm, came 
on louder than before, and he bad norodksto 
shelter him now. While he was in this quan- 
dary, he sees a light at a distance, and it 
came into his head this might be the lantern 
again, but he determint-d to go on notwith- 
standing, for if it was he could stop short, 
and if it was not he should get shelter, per- 
haps ; so on he went, and I suppose I should 
have done the same, signor." 

"Well! this history never will have an 
end ! " said Schedoni. 

"Well, signor, he had riot gone far when 
he found''out that it was no lantern, but a 
light at a window. When he came up to the 
house he knocked softly at the door, but no- 
body camo." 

" Wh-it house?" iii quired the confessor, 
sharply. 
"The nia beat hard, signor, find 1 wir^ 



rant poor old Marco waited a loiq^llBMbtto 
he knocked again, for lie was inaiii -pi^iedt. 
signor. Oh I how I have seen bim Usta4o.a 
story, let it be ever so long ! " 

"I have need of his patientel" saU 
Schedoni. 

" When he knocked i^^, sigiUir, the 
door gave way a little, ana he found it «M 
open, and so, as nobody cameL he thoniglteflt 
to walk in of his own acoont. 

" The dotard t what business had be to be 
so curious ? " exclaimed SchedcmL • 

" Curious, signor, he only so^ht sbdlgr 1 
He stumbled about in the dark for a. jpod 
while, and could find nobody, nor make no- 
body hear, but, at last he cane to «• loan 
where there was some fire, not ^ulte oat.,u|iBn 
the hearth, and he went up to it to walrm flv- 
self till somebody should come." 

' ' What ! was there nobody in the ^OtM^** 
said the confessor. 

" You shall hear, signor. .He bad nDtbfin 
there, he said, no, he was sure not a|MsretifO 
minutes, when he heard a' strange aort'<x<a 
noise in the very room where he waa,. ^ofc ifte 
fire gave such a poor light he ooiild notice 
whether anybody was there." 
, "What was the noise?" 

*' You put me out, signor. He. said he U 
not much like it, but what oouM he dp?. So 
he stirred up the fire, and tried to nolBe it 
blaze a little, but it vras as duslqr ns ever } be 
could see nothing. Presently, however* lie 
heard somebody coming, and saw a fight, 
and then a man coming towards tfaeioom 
where he was, so he went up] to ask shelter." 

" Who was this man ? " said Schedoni. 

" Ask shelter. He says the man^ when lie 
came to the door of the room, turned aaidiite 
as a sheet, as. well he might to see a itOTgir 
—to find a stranger there at that timis of ^^. 
I suppose I should have done the aameoys* 
self. The man did not seem vot willinig to 
let him stay, but asked what he diathereb-nnd 
such like ; but the storm was vexy load* laid 
so Marco did not let a little matter daanl hba, 
and when he showed the man wbat,a;A!B 
fish he had in his basket, and said m.wji 
welcome to it, he seeined more willing 7 . '^. 

" Incredible I " exclaim^ Schedoni ; *.t^ 
blockhead ! " ' . , . ,. 

"He had wit enough^. fpr that matter, 
signor ; Marco says he apb^ared to be innia 
hungry " 

" Is that any proof of his'.wit?" tiiifl'tbe 
confessor, i)eevish]y. ' .',..♦ 

"You never wil^ Jet me finishV . signor;; 
main hungry, for he {^ut more wopj^^on, the 
fire directly to dress some of tbe^^.r While 
he uas doing this, Marco says , his heart 
somehow misgave him that this was the mafi 
he saw on the beach, and he loolied.at him 
pretty bard, till the other asked him, crossly, 
what he stared at him so.for; lHit-|{f 
\o6Vl <;«{« nox Mc> \j^ WUIe ^ vai 




v — 



THE ITALIAN, 



I3t 



makfaig rewl^ die flsh, towever, Marco had 
an opp ortuni ty of eyeing him the more ; and 
every tiiM the man loolced round the room. 
wfcddr happened to be pretty often, he had a 
notion it was the same. ' 

'* Wdl and if it was the same ? " said Sche- 
doni. 

" But when Marco happened to spy the 
sack lying in a comer, he had no doubt about 
the matter. He says his heart then misgave 
him sadly, and he wished himself safe out of 
thelKMise^ and determined in his own mind. 
to get away as toon as he could, without let- 
tif^the-mansuspeet what he thought of him. 
He now guessed, too. what made the man 
look round the room so often ; and« though 
Iferoo thought before it was to find out if 
he had brought anybody with him, be now 
believed it was to see whether his treasure 
waaadb." 
' " Ave^ Hkely enough," observed Schedoni. 

'* Wdl, €>la Marco sat not mudi at his ease, 
whOethe fish was preparing, and thought it 
was ^ont of the frying-pan into the fire with 
him ; but what could be do? " 

" Why-get up and walk away, to be sure.'* 
said the cottfessor, " as I sliaU do, if your 
story lasts much longer." 
- " Yoii ibaAl hear, signor ; he would have 
done so, if he hM thought this man would 
have let him ; but*— " 

"Well, this man^was Spalatro, I suppose, " 
aakl Schedoni, impatiently, "and this was 
the house on (he shore yon formerly men- 
tioned." 

" How well you have guessed it, signor ! 
(hough, to Isay truth, I have been expecting 
you to find it out for this half-hour." 

Schedoni did not like the significant look 
whidi the peasant assumed while he said this, 
but he bade him proceed. 

"At first, signor, Spalatro hardly spoke a 
word ; but he came to by degrees, and by the 
time the fish was nearly ready he was talka- 
tive enough*. 

Here the confessor rose with some emotion 
and paced the room. 

" Poor old Marco, signor, began to think 
better of him ; and when he heard the rain at 
the casements he was loath to think of stir- 
ring. Presently Spalatro went cut of the 
room for a plate to eat the fish ." 

'* Out of the room ?" said Schedoni, and 
checked his steps. 

" Yes, signor, but htf took care to carry the 
light with him. However, Marco, who had 
a great deal of curiosity-to " 

" Yes, he appears to have had a great deal, 
indeed I " said the confessor, and, turning 
iiwfty, renewed his paoe. 
• •• Nay, signor, I am not come to that yet ; 
he has shown none yet ;— a great deal of 
curiosity to know what was in the sack, be- 
Ibrtf ho 'Consented to let himself stay much 
Muger» Hbooffbt tbi§ a good opportunity for 



looking, and as the fire was now pretty bright, 
he determined to sec. He went up to the 
sack, therefore, signor, and tried to lift it, but 
it was too heavy for him, though it did not 
seem full." 

Schedoni again checked his steps, and 
stood fixed before the peasant. 

*' He raised it, however, a little, sif^nor ;but 
it fell from his hands, and with such a heavy 
weight upon the floor that h? w.is sure it 
held no common booty. Just then, he says, 
he thought he heard Spalatro coming, and 
the s^und of the sack was enough to have 
frightened him, and so Marco quitted it ; l>ut 
he was mistaken, and he went to it a^ain. 
But vou don't seem to hear me, signor. for 
you look as you do when you are in those 
quandaries, so busy a-thinking, and I " 

" Proceed," said Schedoni, sternly, and 
renewed his steps ; " I hear you." 

** Went to it again," resumed the p^sant, 
cautiously taking up the story at the last 
words he had dropped. " He untied the 
string, signor, that held tiie sack, and opened 
the cloth a little way ; but think, signor, what 
he must have thou,i;ht when he felt cold 
flesh 7 Oh, signor 1 and when he saw by the 
light of the fire the face of the corpse within ! 
Oh, signor!" 

The peasant, in the eagerness with which 
he related this circumstance, had followed 
Schedoni to the other end of the chamber ; 
and he now took hold of his garment as if to 
secure his attention to the remainder of the 
story. The confes-sor, h jwcver, continued 
his steps, and the peasant kept pace with 
him, still loosely holding his garment. 

•• Marco," he resumed, " was so terrified, 
as my f ither says, that he hardly knew where 
he was ; and I warrant, if one could have 
seen him, he looked as white, signer, as you 
do now." 

The confessor abruptly withdrew his gar- 
ment from the peasant's grasp, and said, in 
an inward voice, *'If I am shocked at the 
mere mention of such a spectacle, no wonder 
he was who beheld it I " After the pause of 
a moment, he added, •• But what followed? " 

" Marco says he had no power to tie up 
the cloth again, signor ; and when he came to 
his thoughts, his only fear was lest Spalatro 
should return — though he had hardly been 
gone a minute— before he could get out of the 
house, for he cared nothing about the storm 
now. And sure enough he heard him com- 
ing ; but he managed to get out of the room 
into a passage another way from that Spalatro 
was in. And luckily, too, it was the same 
passage he had come in by, and it led him 
out of the house. He made no more ado, 
but ran straight off, without stopping to 
choose his way, and many perils and dangers 
he got into amoag th^ ^oo^ XJjX'aJL tC\^\.^ 
and " 

" How happenceLil OaaX >3av& ^^?iJkaX.to-«^ 



»3^ 

not taken 

Schedoni. 
it?" 

" Why, signor, old Marco had like to have 
caught his death that night ; what with the 
wet and what with the fright, he was laid up 
with a fever and was light-headed, and raved 



THE ITAUAS\ 
discovery?" said it half ; and if you vouU oolgr plcMO W^ 



up after this 

•* What was the consequence of patient ' 

"Though I can only smfle at thtHiiUDBta- 
narrative, repeated Schedooi. in a loHder- 

tone 

'* Nay, sfgnor, for that matter, yoa ctn 
frown at it too, as I can testify," mnttind 



su( h strange things that people would not the guide. 



believe anything he said when he came to his 
sens*'S." 

"Aye," sa'd Schedoni. the narrative re- 
sembles a deli'ious dream more than a 
reality ; " I peifecdy accord with them in 
their opinion of this feverish old man." 

" But you shall hear, signor. After a while 
they began to think better of it, and there 
was sdme stir made about it ; but what could 
poor folks do, for nothing could be proved ! 
The house was searched, but the man was 
gone, and nothing could be foimd I From 
that time the place was shut up, till, many 



"Listen to me ! " said the comleaMr. \tk 9k 
yet more insisting vo ce. " I say, thac 
though I ^ve no credit to your ouripw 
history, I think this same Spalatxo appearato 
be a desperate fellow, and, therefore, I vonkl 
have you be on your goard. If you Bee hinit 
you may depend upon it that be wiU at- 
tempt your life in revenge of tbe injiuy I 
have done him. I give yon. therefore^ in 
addition to your trombone, this stiletto to 
defend you." 

Schedoni, while he spoke, took an instni- 
ment from his bosom, but it was not tbe one 



"This will defend yon mere adroitlyt.' 
plied Schedoni. refusing to take back tbe 



years after this, Spalatro appeared ; and old he usually wore, or, at least, that bo was 

Marco then said he was pretty sure he was seen to wear. He delivered ittothepeisant. 

the man, but he could not swear it and so who received it with a kind of stnpid surprise^ 

nothing could be done." and then gave him some directions as to tbe 

" Then it appears after all that you are not way in which it should be managed, . 

certain that this long history belongs to this "Why, signor." said the man, wbo bad 

Spalatro!" said the confessor; "nay, not listened with much attention, **I am bindly 

even that the histoiy itself is anything more obliged to you for thinking abont me ; bntis 

than the vision of a distempered brain I " there anything in this stiletto diffiBie&t froia 

"I do not know, signor, what you may others, that it is to be used so ? " 

call certain ; but I know what we all believe. Schedoni looked gravely at the peasant for 

But the strangest part of the story is to come an instant, and then replied, " certainly not, 

yet, and that which nobody would believe, friend ; I would only instruct you tonseit to 

hardly, if " the best advantage ; farewdl I " 

"I have heard enough," said Schedoni ; "Thank you kindly, signor, bnt— but I 

" I will hear no more ! '' think I have no need of it ;' my trombone is 

"Well but, signor, I have not told you enough for me." 
half yet; and I am sure when I heard it my- 
self it 50 terrified roe " 

"I have listened too long to this idle his- stiletto; "and moreover, while yon 

tory," said the confessor ; ** there seems to be loading the trombone your adversary migbt 

no rational foundation for it. Here is what use his poniard to advantage. Keep it*- 

I owe you; you may depart." therefore, friend ; it will protect you better 

"Well, signor, tis plain you know the than a dozen trombones. Put it up." 

rest already, or you never would go without Perhaps it was Schedoni 's particular look, 

it. But you don't know, perhaps, signor, more than his argument, that convince d tbe 

what an unaccountable— I am sure it made guide of the value of his gift. He received it 

my hair stand on end to hear of it, what an submissivdy, though with a stare of 8tn|Hd 

unaccountable " surprise ; probably it had been better if it 

"I will htar no more of this absurdity," had been suspicious surprise. He thanked 

interrupted Schedoni, with sternness. "I Schedoni again, and was leaving the room 

reproach myself for having listened so long wh«n the confessor called out, '- Send tbe 

to !-u< h a |>ossip's tale, and have no further landlord to me immediately ; I shall sfst off 

curiosity concerning it. You may withdraw, for Rome without delay." 

and bid the host attei d me." "Yes. signor," replieid the peosant ; "yon 

" Well s'gnor, if >ou are so easilv satisfied," are at the right place — the road pans here; 

replie ' the peasint, with r'isappointment, but I thought you was going for Naples." 

*' iherr- is no mt re to be said, but " " For Rome," said Schedoni. 

"You may stay, however, while I caution *'For Rome, signor! Well, I hope you 

you," said Schedoni, "how you pass the will get safe, signor, with all my heart," said 

villa, where this Spalatro may yet linger; for, the guide, and quitted the chamber. 

though I can only smile at the story you While this dialogue had been passing be- 

have related^---" tween Schedoni and the peasant, Ellena, in 

"Related, signor I why 1 have not told soUlude, y^as coiv&vdftiim^ on the means of 



V 



THE ITAUAN. 



133 



tnremiiisg ca tlic confessor to allow her to 
Ktarn either to Altieri or to the neighbour- 
ing cloister of Our Lady of Pity, instead 
of placing her at a distance from Naples, till 
he should think proper to acknowledge her. 
'Ilie plan which he had mentioned sd med to 
her long-harassed mind to exile her for evfr 
from happiness, and all thU was drar to her 
affections. It appeared like a second banish- 



would be as effectually preserved as if she 
were at a hundred miles from Nnples. 

It may appear extraordinary that a man of 
Schedoni's habitual coolnrss and exact cal- 
culation should have suffcrifd fear on this 
occasion 10 O'scur^.* his perceptions : and this 
instance stron/jly provtd \\w mngiiitudi* of 
the cnnse which could prorluci; \o powerful 
an K ffi'cl. While he now listened to Kllfna. 



ment to San Stefano ; and every abbess, ex- he bifjan to perceive circumstana-s tint hatl 

ccpt that of La Pieta, came to her imagica- eluded his own observation ; and he, at 

tion in the portraiture of an inexorable gaoler. length, acknowledged that it mij;hr be . •safer 

While this subject engaged h<r she was to permit her to return to Villa-Altieri. and 

summoned to attend Schedoni, whom she that she should from thence i;o. as she had 

found impatient to' enter the carriage which formerly intended, to La Pieta! than to place 

at this town they had been able to procure, her in any convent, however remote, where it 



EDena, on looking out for the guide, was 
informed that he had already set off for his 
home, a circumstance for the suddenness of 
which she knew not how to account. 

The travellers immediately proceeded on 
their journey. S^'hedoni, reflecting on the 
laie conversation, said little ; and Ehena read 
not in bis countenance anything that might 
enconrage her to introduce the subject of her 
own intended solicitation. Thus separately 
occulted they advanced durme some hours 
on the road to Naples, for thither Schedoni 
had design«l to go, notwithstanding his late 
assertion to the guide, whom it appears, for 
whatever reason, he was anxious to deceive 
as to the place of bis actual residence. 

They stopped to dine at a town of some 
consideration, and, when Ellena heard the 
confessor inquire concerning the numerous 
convents it contained, she perceived that it 
was necessary for her no longer to defer her 
petition. She therefore represented imme- 
diately what must be the forlornness of her 
State, and the anxiety of her mind, if she were 
l^ced at a distance from the scenes and the 



would be necessary for himself to introduce 
her. Ills only ri-maining objection to ihe 
neighbourhood of Naplrs now rested on the 
chance it would off'-r the Marchess di Vivaldi 
of d scovering Ellena's abode btfore he 
should judge it convenient to disclose to her 
any hint respecting his family ; and his know- 
It dge of the Man hcsa justified his most hor- 
rible suspicion f«s to the consequence of such 
a premature discovery. 

Something, however, it appeared, must l)e 
risked in any situation he might ( hoose for 
Ellena : and her residence at the Sfinta del'a 
Pjcta, a large convent, well secured, and 
where, as she had been known to them from 
her infancy, the abbess and the s-sters nii£.'ht 
be supposed to be not indift'erent concerning 
her welfnre, seemed to premise securiiy 
against any actual violence from the m;ili<e 
of the Marchesa— against her aitful dupiiciiv 
every place would be almost equally insiifli- 
cient. Here, as Ellena would appear in llie 
character she had always been known in, 
no cuiiosity could be excited or suspicion 
awakened as to her family ; and here, there- 



people which affection and early habit seemed fore, Schedoni's secret would more probably 
to have consecrated ; especially at this time, be preserved ihan elsewhere. As this was at 
when her spirits had scarcely recovered from present the predominant subject of his anxiety, 



the severe pressure of long-suffering, and 
when, to soothe and renovate them, not only 
quiet but the consciousness of security were 
neceasaiy ; a consciousness which it was im- 
possible, and especially so soon after her late 
experience, that she could acquire amongst 
strangers till they should cease to be such. 

To these pleadings Schedoni thoughtfully 
attended, but the darkness of his aspect did 



to which, however unnatural it may S'leni, 
even the safety of Ellena was secondary, he 
finally determined that she should return to 
La Pieta ; and she thanked him almost with 
tears for a consent which she received as a 
generous indulgence, but which was in reality 
little more than an effect of stlfihli appie- 
hensions. 

The remainder of the journey, wliich was 
not ^icate that his compassion was touched ; of some days, passed without any ren arl- able 
and £nena proceeded to represent, secondly, occurrence. Schedoni, with only short in- 
that which, had she been more artful, or less tervals, was still enveloped in g com and 
disdainful of cunning, she would have urged silence ; and Elltna, with thoughts engaged 
the first. As it was, she had begun wi'h the by the one subject of l.cr interest — the prc- 
mention of circumstances which, though she sent situation and circumstances of Vivaldi — 
felt to be most important to herself, were the willingly submitttd to this prolonged still- 
least likely to prevail with Schedoni ; and she ness. 

concluded with representing that which was As at length she drew near Naples, her 
most interesting to him. Ellena suggested emotions became more various and powerful ; 
that her re&dence in the neighbourhood of and when she d\sl\iigv\\'&Y\^^ >\v^ vc^"^ c\ N <i»a- 
AltM might loe bo managed that his secret vius peering ovei ev^ mVttN^xixxi^^v^'ccccK^.^ 



154 THE ITAUAN. 

she wmt as hef iflU^n&tio& diaiactered all that if he shodd happen to team' 1^ df, 
the well-known countnr it overlooked. But cumstances of his oooditloii, iiie shpiddlWl 
when, having reached an eminence, that remain ignorant of them, 
scenery was exhibited to her senses ; when This, assurance revived EOeoa; ' Hor :t#o 
the Bay of Naples, stretching into remotest reasons : it afforded her a hope of td)Bf 
distance, was spread out t)eifore her; when from her present uncerbdnty, and it .utf 
every mountain of that magnificent horizon seemed to express a dj^^ree ci a pp ir6b ati bn 
which enclosed her native landscape, that of the object of her afiection, soch ai thA 
eountry which she believed Vivaldi to inhabit, confessor had never yet disclosed. Sdieddnl 
stood unfolded, how affecting, how over- added Uiat he should see her no more till he. 
whelming were her sensations I Eveiy object thouf^ht proper to acknowledge her lor Ul 
seemed to speak of her home, of Vivaldi, dai^ghter ; but that, if drcumstaneea made It 
and of happiness that was passed ; and so necessary, he should in the meantime write to 
exquisitely cud regret mingle with hope, the her ; and he now gave her a dixectioii fay 
tender grief of remembrance with the in- which to address him under a fktitioni 
terest of expectation, that it were difficult to name, and at a place remote from his oon- 
say which prevailed. vent. Ellena, though assured of the neoeaiiitj 

Her expressive countenance disclosed to for this conduct, could not yidd to su^ dla- 
the confessor the course of her thoughts and guise without an aversion that was strbogHy. 
of her feelings— feelings which, while he con- expressed in her manner, but of which ScSe- 
temned, he believed he perfectly compre- doni took no notice. He bade her, as. Aa 
heoded. but of which, having never in any valued her existence, waitchfully to praserrt 
degree experienced them, he really imder- the secret of her birth ; and to waste not a 
stood nothing. The callous Scbedoni, b^ a single day at ViUa-Altieri. bat to retire to La 
mistake not uncommon, especially to a mind Pieta ; and these injunctions were ddlviB<e4 
of his order, substituted words for truths ; not in a manner so solemn and energetic as not' 
only confotmding the limits of neighbouring only deeplv to impress upon her miod Che 

?ualities, but mistaking their very principles, necessity of fulfilling them but to esdttt a 
ncapable of perceiving their nice distinctions, degree of amazement, 
he c^led the persons who saw them merely Afta: a short and general divoedon 
fanciful ; thus making his very incapacity an pecting her further conduct, Sdhed o nt tiidB 
argument for his superior wisdom. And, her farewell, and, privately quitting tb^ ^dOa 
while he confounded delicacy of feeling with in his ecclesiastical dress, rfmired to the Do^ 
latuity of mind, taste with caprice, and ima- minican convent, which he entered as ^ 
gination with error, he yielded, when he most brother returned from a distant pU^jimagei 
congratulated himself on his sagacity, to illu- He was received as usual by the sociely. and 
sions not less egregious because they were found himself once more the austere firtlier 
less brilliant than those which are incident to Schedoni of the Spirito Santo, 
sentiment and feeling. The cause of his first anxietjT was the necea- 
The better to escape observation, Schedoni sity for justifying himself to the Marcbesa dl 
had contrived to avoid reaching Naples till Vivaldi, for ascertaining how much he m^^ht 
the close of evening, and it was entirely venture to reveal of the truth, and fqr estimate 
dark before the carriage stopped at the gate ing what would be her decision were she in- 
of the Villa-Altieri. Ellena, with a mixture formed of the whole. His second step woold 
of melancholy and satisfaction, viewed once be to obtain the release of Vivaldi ; and, as his 
more her long-deserted home ; and while she conduct in this instance would be ragulatedfin 
waited till a servant should open the gate, a great degree, by the result of his confereaoe 
remembered how often she had thus waited with the Marcbesa, it would be onh Ifae 
when there was a beloved friend within to second. However painful it must be tQ 
welcome her with smiles, which were now Schedoni to meet her, now that he had dia? 
gone for ever. Beatrice, the old housekeeper, covered the depth of the gmlt in whidt she 
at length, however, appeared, and received would have involved him, he detennined to 



her with an affection as sincere, if not as 
strong, as that of the relative for whom she 
mourned. 
Here Schedoni alighted, and, having dis- 



seek this eventful conference on the foUowlng 
morning : and he passed this night partly In 
uneasv expectation of the approachinig day, 
but chiefly in inventing circumstances and 



missed the carriage, entered the house for arranging arguments that might bear him tri- 

the purpose of relinquishing also his disguise, umphantly towards the accomplishment ' 01 

and resuming his monk's habit. Before he his grand design, 
departed, Ellena ventured to mention Vivaldi, ■ 

and to express her wish to hear of his exact 

situation ; but, though Schedoni was too well CHAPTER XXIV. 

enabled to inform her of it, the policy which CCHEDONI, on his way tp.th^ 

had hitherto kept him silent on this subject *^ palace, again reviewed, and' s 

gtHI induenced bim ; and he replied only every ^Mgvxm^^QX, ox t^^<et %^i«&:tQ& 




THB ITAUAN. 



135 



\t which might induce the Marchesa's 
■rt lo U)e nuptials he so much desired, 
fomiljr wds uobU. though no longer 
by, and he believed that, ab Um ceeming 
of descent had hitherto been the chief 
ion to EUena, the Marchesa might be 
iled with to overlook the wreck of his 

the palace he was told that the Marchesa 
t one of her villas on U)e bay ; and he 
x> anxious not to follow her thither im- 
.tely. This delightfiU residence was 
sd on an airy promontory that overhung 
Iter, and was nearly embosomed among 
dods that spread far along the heights, 
lescended, with great pomp of folis^e 
xdouring, to the very margin of the 
I. It seemed scarcely possible that 
r oould inhabit so enchanting an abode ; 
M Marchesa was wretched amidst all 
hizuries of nature and art, which would 

r'fected the happiness of an innocent 
Her heart was possessed by evil pas- 
, and all her perceptions were distorted 
lisoolouied by them, which, like a dark 
;liii, had power to change the fairest 
B into those of gloom and desolation, 
a servants had orders to admit father 
loni at all times, and he was shown into 
xmin which the Marchesa was alone, 
r object in this apartment announced 
add even magnificence. The hangings 
of purple and gold ; the vaulted ceiling 
lesigned-by one of the first painters of 
jenetian school ; the marble statues that 
led the recesses were not less exquisite, 
the whole symmetry and architecture, 
pet rich— gay, yet chastened — resembled 
liace of a fairy, and seemed to possess 
It equal fascinations. The lattices were 
n open to admit the prospect, as well as 
r loaded with fragrance from an orangery 
ipread before them. Lofty palms and 
uns threw their green and refreshing 
ver the windows, and on the lawn that 
1 to the edge of the precipice a shadowy 
ective, beyond which appeared the ample 
I of the gulf, where the light sails of 
aa, and the spreading canvas of larger 
la, glided upon the scene, and passed 
, asla a camera obscura. Vesuvius and 
ty of Naples were seen on the coast be- 
with many a bay and lofty cape of that 
tract of bold and gaily-coloured scenery 
I extends towarc^ Cape Campanella, 
led by fading ranges of mountains, 
!d up with all the magic of Italian sun-i 
, . The Marchesa reclined on a sofa 
9 an open lattice; her eyes were fixed 
the prospect without, but her attention 
wholly occupied by the visions that evil 
>ns painted to her im£^ination. On her 
t)eautiful features was the langour of 
Dtent and indisposition ; and thou£fh 
qanners^ ^ke ^er dr^s^ dispiUyed the 



elegant negligence of the graces, they con- 
cealed the movements of a careful and even 
a tortured heart. On perceiving Schcdoni a 
faint smile lightened up her countenance, 
<^nd she held Forth her hand to him, at the 
touch ot wiiicK h^ shuddered. 

"My food father. I rcjoU* to see you," 
said the Marchesa ; " I have felt the «»*&* of 
your conversation much, and at this moment 
of indisposition especially. " 

She waved to the attendant to withdraw : 
while Schcdoni, stalking to a window, could 
with difficulty conceal the perturbation with 
which he now, for the first time, consciously 
beheld the willing destroyer of his child. 
Some further compliment from the Marchesa 
recalled him ; he soon recovered all his 
address, and, approaching her, said : 

"Daughter 1 you always send me away a 
worse Dominican than I come. I approach 
you with humility, but depart elated with 
pride, and am obliged to suffer much from 
self-infliction before I can descend to my 
proper level." 

After some other flatteries had been ex- 
changed, a silence of several moments fol- 
lowed, during which neither of the parties 
seemed to have sufficient courage to introduce 
the subjects that engaged their thoughts, sub- 
jects upon which their interests were now so 
directly and unexpectedly opposite. Had 
Schedoni been less occupied by his own feel- 
ings, he might have perceived the extreme 
agitation of the Marchesa, the tremor of her 
nerves, the faint flush that crossed her cheek, 
the wanness that succeeded, the languid move- 
ment of her eyes, and the laborious sighs that 
interrupted her breathing, while she wished, 
yet dared not ask, whether Ellena was no 
more, and averted her regards from him 
whom she almost believed to be a murderer. 

Schedoni, not less affected, though ap- 
parently tranquil, as sedulously avoided the 
face of the Mardiesa, whom he considered 
with a degree of contempt edmost equal to his 
indignation : his feelings had reversed, for the 
present, all his opinion on the subject of their 
former arguments, and had taught him, for 
once, at least, to think justly. Every moment 
of silence increased his embarrassment and 
his reluctance even to name Ellena. He 
feared to tell that she lived, yet despi*>ed him- 
self for suffering such fear, and shuddered at 
a recollection 01 the conduct which had made 
any assiuance concerning her life necessary. 
The insinuation that he had discovered her 
family to be such as would not degrade that 
of the Marchesa, he knew not how to in- 
troduce with such delicacy of graduation as 
might win upon the jealousy of her pride and 
soothe her disappointment ; and he was still 
meditating how he could lead to this subject, 
when the Marchesa herself broke t.V\& ^^Sl^t^kj^ 

" Father," she said, V\V!Q.«k.»^, ^^li^vrKs'b 
look to you tor GOi^sc^tioUi «ad «xa «^^^^ 



136 THE ITALIAN. 

disappointed. You are too well acquainted the Marchess, betrayed bjr the Texatinn 

with the anxiety which has long oppressed me ; suffered. ' ' Such sentini»*» "Ufl «ud> co"|^ 

may I understand that the cause of it is re- pliments are. »ike gala suits, to be put on IB 

moved?" She paused, and then added. fi»<= weather. My day is doadj; let me 

•• May I hope that my son will no longer be have a little plain sense : infonn me of UM 

led from the observanoe or bis duty ? " circumstances which have occasioned tfab 

S.-hedna*) ^vith his eyes fixed on the ground, change in the course of voor obsermdoni^ 

remained silent, but at length said, " The and, good father, be brief. ' 



chief occasion for your anxiety is certainly Schedoni ihen unfolded, but with 

removed ! " and be was again silent. and his usual art, such particulars rdadve to 

"How!" exclaimed the Marchesa. with the family of EUena as he hoped would soften 

the quick-sightedness of suspicion, while all the aversion of the Marchesa to the 



her dissimulation yielded to the urgency of tion, and incline her, in consideration of her 

her fear. "Have you failed? Is she not son's tranquillity, finally to approve it ; with 

dead ? " which disclosure he mingled a pUosible idtp 

In the earnestness of the question she fixed tion of the way in which the di sco ieiy bad 



her eyes on Schedoni's face, and, perceiving been made, without, however, betrajriof by 
there symptoms of extraordinary emotion, the most dis'ant hint how neariy tUs dll- 
added, " Relieve me of my apprehensions, covery affected himself, 
good father, I entreat ; tell me that you have The Marchesa's patience would scaredy 
succeeded, and that she has paid the debt of await the conclusion of his narrative, or hv 
justice." disappointment submit to the curb of diicre- 

Schedoni raised his eyes to the Marchesa, tion. When at length he had finishert Us 
but instantly averted them ; indignation had history, *' Is it possible," said she, with fid- 
lifted them, and disgust and stifled horroj- ful displeasure, "that you have suffered jroor- 
tumed them away. Though very little of self to be deceived by the plausibility of a 
these feelings appeared, the Marchesa per- girl who might have been expected to otter 
ceivcd such expression as she had never been any falsehood which should ^;ipear likely to 
accustomed to observe in his countenance; protect her? Has a man of your discernment 
and her surprise and impatience increasing, given faith to this idle and improbable tale? 
she repeated the question, and with a yet Say rather, father, that your rescdution fidled 
more insisting air than before. in the critical moment, and that yon an now 

"I have not failed in the grand object," anxious to form excuses to yoiffsdf for a 
replied Schedoni ; " your son is no longer in conduct so pusillanimous." 
danger of forming a disgraceful alliance." "I am not apt to give an easy faith to 

"In what, then, have you failed?" asked appearances/'replied Schedoni, gravely, "and 
the Marchesa; "for I perceive that you have snil less to shrink from the performanoe Of 
not been completely successful." nny act which I judge to be necessary and 

" I ought not to say that I have friilcd in just. To the last intimation I noake no reply ; 
any respect," replied' Schedoni, with emo- it does not become my character to vindicate 
tion, "since the honour of your house is myself from an implication of falsehood." 
preserved, and — a life is spared." The Marchesa, perceiving that her passion 

His voice faltered as he pronounced the had betrayed her into imprudence, conde- 
last words, and he seemed to experience again scended to apologise for that which she 
the horror of that moment when, with an up- termed an effect of her extreme anxiety as to 
lifted poniard io his grasp, he had discovered what might follow from an act of such in* 
Ellena for his daughter. discreet indulgence ; and Sdiedoni as williqgly 

"Spared ! " repeated the Marchesa, doubt- accepted the apology, each believing the a»> 
ingly. " Explain yourself, good father." sistance of the other necessary to success. 

"She lives," replied Schedoni ; "but you Schedoni then ioformed her that he had 
have nothing, therefore, to apprehend. " better authority for what he had advanced 

The Marchesa, surprised no less by the than the assertion of Ellena ; and he men- 
tone in which he spoke than shocked at the tioned some circumstances which proved Mai 
purport of his words, changed countenance, to be more anxious for the reputation than the 
while she said, impatiently, " You speak in truth of bis words. Believing that his or^gifB 
enigmas, father." was entirely unknown to the Marchesa, be 

" Lady ! I speak plain truth — she lives." ventured to disclose some Imrther partlcolus 

"I understand that stzflicieRtly," said the of Ellena's family, without apprehending that 
Marchesa ; "but when you te)] me J have it could lead to a suspicion of his own. 
nothing to apprehend ' ' The Marchesa, though neither appeased vat 

" I tell you truth, also," rejoined the con- convinced, commanded her feelings so ftr as 

fessor ; " and the benevolence of your nature to appear tranquil, while the confessor re- 

may be permitted to rejoice, for justice no presented, with the most delicate address, tbfl 

ionga-has forbidden the exerdse of mercy." unhappiness of her son, and the satisfactioii 

"Thai is aU very wdlin its plaWi" sadd ^\uc\x ta>»\. fmaKV^f t^si]^^ \n \«A^ 



THE ITALIAN. 



«37 



aoquiesoeDCe with his choice, since the object 
of it was known to be worthy of bis alliance. 
He added that, while he had believed the 
contrary, he had proved himself as strenuous 
to prevent as he was now sincere in approving 
their marrist^c ; and concluded with gently 
blaming her ux* suffering prejudice and some 
remains of resentment to obscure her excellent 
understanding. " Trusting to the natural 
deamess of your perceptions," he added, 
*' I doubt not that when you have maturely 
considered the subject, every objection will 
yidd to a consideration of your son's happi- 



The earnestness with which Schedoni 
pleaded for Vivaldi excited some surprise ; 
but the Marchesa, without condescending to 
reply either to his argument or remonstrance, 
inquiied whether EUena had a suspicion of 
the design with which she had br.en carried 
into the forest of the Gorganus, or concerning 
the identity of her persecutor. Schedoni. 
immediately perceiving to what these questions 
tendedi repliedt with the facility with which 
he uanudly accommodated his conscirnce to 
his interest, that EUena was totally ignorant 
as to who were her immediate persecutors. 
and equally unsuspicious of any other evil 
having been intended her than that of a 
temparary confinement. 

Trie last assertion was admitted by the 
Marchesa to be probable till the boldness of 
tha first made her doubt the truth of each, 
and occasioned her new surprise and conjec- 
ture as to the motive which could induce 
Schedoni to venture these untruths. She 
then inquired where Ellenawas now disposed 
of, but he bad too much prudence to disclose 
the place of her retreat, however plausible 
might be the air with which the inquiry was 
ui^ged : and he endeavoured to call off her 
attention to Vivaldi. The confessor did not, 
however, venture, at present, to give a hint 
as to the pretended discovery of his situation 
in the Inquisition, but reserved to a more 
lavoQiable opportunity such mention, together 
with a zealous offer of his services to extri- 
cate the prisoner. I'he Marchesa, believing 
that her son was still engaged in pursuit of 
Ellena, made many inquiries concerning him, 
but without expressing any solicitude for his 
welRadi^. resentment appearing to be the only 
emotion she retained towards him. While 
Schedoni replied with circumspection to her 
questions, he urged inquiries of his own as to 
the manner in which the Marchese endured 
the long absence of Vivaldi, thus endeavour- 
ing to ascertain how far he might hereafter 
venture to appear in any efforts for liberating 
him, and how shape his conduct respecting 
EUena. It seemed that the M archest was 
not indifferent as to his son's absence ; and. 
though he had at first believed the search for 
EDena to have occasioned it, other apprehen- 
now disturbed him, and faught him the 



feelings of a father. Ills nunirrous avoca- 
tions and intcri'sts. however, seemed to iire- 
vent such anxiety from prcyiui? upun hii 
mind : and. having disnii>)SL*d i>c'n>ons in 
search of Vivaldi, he pabbcd his time in the 
usual routine of company and the court. Of 
the actual situation of h s siiU it was cwiileiit 
that neither he nor the Miirchcsi had tic 
IciUit apprehension, and this was a circu in- 
stance which the conie^sor was very circ.ul 
to abccrtain. 

IBcf'tre \vi took leav<; he ventured to renew 
the mention of Vivaldi's att:u:hnient. and 
gently to plead for him. The Marchesa, 
however, seemed inattentive to what he repie- 
sented, till at lcn;{th awakening from her 
reverie, she siid, " Father, you ha\ejudKi'd 

ill " and liefore she concluded thf. s«n- 

tence, she relapsed a^Min into thuu;;liiiul 
silence. Relieving; tliHt he anticipated h>:r 
meaning, Schedoni be^an to rep«-at his own 
justification respecting his conduct towards 
Ellcna. 

" You have jud«;i'd erroneously, father," 
resumed the March- ba, with the s.iine con- 
sidering air, "in j)lac:ng the girl in such a 
situation ; my son cinnot fail to discover her 
there." 

"Nor wherever she may be." replied the 
confessor, believing that he understood the 
Marchesa 's aim. *' It may not be possible to 
conceal her long from his search." 

"ThtJ neighbourhood of Naples ought at 
least to have b=en avoided," observed the 
Marchesa. 

Schedoni was silent, and she added. "So 
near also to his own residence ! How far is 
La Pirta from the Vivaldi palace? " 

Though Schedoni had thought that the 
^farche:^a. while displaying a pretended know- 
ledge of Ellena's retreat, was only endeavour- 
ing to obtain a real one. this mention of the 
plicc of her actual residence startled him ; 
but he replied almost immediately. " I am 
ignorant of the distance, for till now I whs 
unacquainted that there is a convent of th:: 
name you mention. It appears, howcvtr. 
tint La Pieta is the place of all others wh'ch 
ought to have been avoided. How could you 
suspect me, lady, of imprudence thus extra- 
vagant 1 " 

While Schedoni spoke, the Marchesa re- 
girded him attentively, and then replied, " I 
may be allowed, good father, to suspect you 
of indiscretion in this instance, since you have 
just given me so unequivocal a proof of it in 
another." 

She would then have changed the subject, 
but Schedoni, believing this inclination to be 
the consequence of her having assured her- 
self that she had actually discovered Ellena's 
asylum, and too reasonably suspecting the 
dreadful uses she designed to make of the 
discovery, endeavoured to uns^\x\^V«,x o^wxvocl 
and mislead hex as \o V\ift i^Vdj;:)^ ^l ^AVltv?!!^ 



I3« 



THE ITAUAN. 



abode. He not only contradicted the fact of 
her present residence at La Pieta, but, with- 
out scruple, made a positive assertion that she 
was at a distance from Naples, naming, at the 
same time, a fictitious place, whose obscurity, 
be added, would be the best protection from 
the pursuit of Vivaldi. 

"Very true, father," observed the Mar- 
ches.!, " I believe that my son will not readilv 
discover the girl in the place you have named. ' 

Whether the Marchesa believed Schedoni's 
assertion or not, she expressed no further 
curii <sity on the subject, and appeared consi- 
derably more tranquil than before. She now 
chatted with ease on general topics, while the 
confessor dared no more to urge the subject 
of his secret wishes ; and, having supported, 
for some time, a conversation most dissonant 
with his temper, he took his leave, and re- 
turned to Naples. On the way thither he 
reviewed, with exactness, the late behaviour of 
the Marchesa, and the result of this exami- 
nation was a resolution never to renew the 
subject of their conversation, but to solemnize 
without her consent the nuptials of Vivaldi 
and Ellena. 

The Marchesa, meanwhile, on the depar- 
ture of Schedoni, remained for some time in 
the very attitude in which he had left her, and 
absorbed bythe interest which his visit excited. 
The sudden change in his conduct no less 
astonished and perplexed than disappointed 
her. She could not explain it by the suppo- 
sition of any principle or motive. Sometimes 
it occurred to her that Vivaldi had bribed him 
with rich promises to promote the marriage 
which he contributed to thwart ; but when 
she considered the high expectations she had 
herself encouraged him to cherish, the im- 
probability of the conjecture was apparent. 
That Schedoni, from whatever cause, was 
no longer to be trusted in this business, was 
sufficiently clear, but she endeavoured to con- 
sole herself with a hope that a confidential 
person might yet be discovered. A part of 
Schedoni's resolution she also adopted, which 
was never again to introduce the subject of 
their late interview. But while she should 
silently pursue her own plans, she determined 
to conduct herself towards the confessor in 
every other respect as usual, not suffering 
him to suspect that she had withdrawn her 
confidence, but inducing him to believe that 
she had relinquished all further designs 
against Ellena. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

■pLLENA, obedient to the command of 
•*-' Schedoni, withdrew from her home on 
the day that followed her arrival there to La 
Pieta. The Superior, who had known her 
from her infancy, and from the acquaintance 
which such long observation afforded both 
esteemed and loved her, received Ellena with 



a degree of satlsfection propo rtl ohale to the 
concern she had suflered when Infonned of 
her disastroos removal from VUla Altferi: ' 

Among the quiet groves of this ocmvtii^ 
however, Ellena vainly endeavoured to mod^ 
rate her solicitude r^speethig the ' sltoaiida 
of Vivaldi ; for, now that she had a respM 
from immediate calamity, she thought w& 
more intense amdety as to what ml^lit be 
his sufferings, and her fears and impatlehcp' 
increased as each day disappointed her et 
pectation of intelligence from Schedont 

If the soothings of sympathy and tbe-deD-' 
cate art of benevolence could have l e st o i eil 
the serenity of her miiid, Ellena would vlam 
have been peaceful ; for all these were oflbnd 
her by the abbess and the sisters pf theSenta. 
della Pieta. They were not acquainted wMk 
the cause of her sorrow, but they 'P ei i t^l fiB d ' 
that she was nnhappy^, and wished her to ht 
otherwise. The society of Our Lady of V^ 
was such as a convent does not often shroud;; 
to the wisdom and virtue of the Superior tfaiB 
sisterhood was principally indebted for the* 
harmony and happiness which distingi^shed 
them. This lady was a shining example fo 
governesses of relijgious houses, and a striking 
instance of the influence which a virtuoak'' 
mind may acquire over others, as weU as of 
the extensive good that it may thus diffuse. She 
was dignified without haughtiness, re)igloa 
without bigotry, and mild, though decisiveatid 
firm. She possessed penetration todi sto fri k " 
what was just, resolution to adhere to it, and' 
temper to practise it with gentleness iqid' 
grace; so that even correction firora heir 
assumed the winning air of courtesy*; JRio 
person whom she admonished, wept In sor- 
row for the offence, instead of being secretly 
irritated by the reproof, and loved net '•> a 
mother, rather than feared her as a Jiidge. 
Whatever might be her failings, th^ .^Vftf^ 
effectually concealed hy the general benevor/, 
lence of her heart and the harmony of |tar 
mind ; a harmony not the effect of toi^ 
feelings, but the accopiplishment 61 canfbA 
and \igilant judgment. Her religion frm 
neither gloomy or bigoted ; it was the senti- 
ment of a grateful heart offering itS((df up to 
a deity who delights in the happinen of iHs 
creatures ; and she conformed to the customs 
of the Roman Chcu-ch without supposing a 
faith in all of them to be necessary to sn^ftF 
tion. This opinion, however, she was obliged 
to conceal, lest her very virtue dibuld dn^w 
upon her the punishment of a crime from 
some fierce ecclesiastics, who contradicted la 
their practice the very essential princ^plei 
which the Christianity they professed would 
have taught them. 

In her lectures to the nuns she stidoin 
touched upon points of faith, but explainei^. 
and enforced the moral duties, par&ulailf 
such as were most practicable in the sodet/ . 
to NvbicYi sbe Yi^oi^^l; snch as tended to* 



THE ITAUAN. 139 

soften and harmonise the affections, to impart of Pausilippo, and Naples itself, with all its 
that repoK of mind which persuades to the crowded suburbs ascending among the hills« 
practice of siitaly UndnesSi universal charity, and mingling^ with vineyards and overtopping 
and the most pore and devated devotion, cypress ; the castle of San Elmo, conspicuoiai 
"When she spokB of religion, it appeared so on its rock, overhanging tlie magnificeaf 
interesdAg, so beautiful, that her attentive monastery of the Chartreux ; while in the 
auditors revered and loved it as a friend, a scene below appeared the Castel Nuovo, with 
refiner of the heart, a sublime consoler ; and its clustered cowers, the long-cxiended CcTrso, 
experienced somewhat of the meelc and holy the mole, with its tall pharos, and ihc har- 
ardour which may belong to angelic natures, bour. gay with painted shipping, busy with 

The society appeared hice a large family, of vessels of all nations continually arriving and 
which the lady abbess was the mother, rather departing, and full to the brim with the Mue 
than an assemblage of strangers ; and par- waters of the bay. Beyond the hills of Naplesi 
ticularlv when, gathered round her, they the whole horizon to the north and east was 
listenecl to the evening sermon, which she bounded by the mountains of the Apcnnine, 
delivered with such affectionate interest, such an amphitheatre proportioned to the granrleur 
persuasive eloquence,and sometimes with such of the plain, which the gulf spread out below, 
pathetic eneigy as few hearts could resist. These terraces, shaded with acacias and 

She enoomged in her convent every in- plane-trees, were the favourite haunt of 
nocent and liberal pursuit which might Eilcna. Between the opening branches, 
iweeten the austerities of confinement, and she looked down upon Villa Altieri, which 
which were generally rendered instrumental brought to her remembrance the affectionate 
to charily. The Daughters of Pity particularly Bianchi, with all the sportive years of her 
cat c dled in music ; not in those difficulties of childhood, and where some of her happiest 
the akt which dis^y florid graces and in- hours had been passed in the society of 
tricate execution, but in such eloquence of Vivaldi. Along the windings of the coast, 
sound as steals upon the heart and awakens too, she could distinguish manv places ren- 
ita sweetest and best affections. It was pro- dered sacred by affection, to which she liad 
bably the well-r^iUated sensibility of their made excursions with her lamented relative 
own minds that enabled these sisters to dif- and Vivaldi ; and, though sadness mingled 
fuse through their strains a character of such with the recollections a view of them restored, 
finely tempered taste as drew crowds of they were precious to her heart Here, alone 
visitofs. on every festival, to the church of the and unobserved, she frequently yielded to the 
Santa ddla PieUu melancholy which she endeavoured to sup- 

The k>cal circumstances of this convent press in society ; and, at other times, tried to 
were scarcely less agreeable than the harmony deceive, with books and the pencil, the lin- 
of its society was interesting. These extensive gering moments of uncertainty concerning the 
domains included olive-grounds, vineyards, state of Vivaldi ; for day after day still 
and scmie corn-land ; a considerable tract was elapsed without bringing any intelllgcncfl 
devoted to. the pleasures of the garden, whose from Schedoni. Whenever the late scenes 
groves supplied walnuts, almonds, oranges, connected with the discovery of her family re- 
and dtrons, in abundance, and almost every curred to Ellena, she vras struck with almost 
Idnd of frmt and flower which this luxurious as much amazement as if she was gazing 
cUmate nurtured. These gardens hung upon upon a vision, instead of recalling realities. 
the slope of a hill about a mile within the Contrasted with the sober truth of her pre- 
ahoR^ and afforded e^^tensive views of the sent life, the past appeared like romance ; 
country round Naples, and of the gulf. But and there were moments when she shrunk 
from the terraces, which extended along a from the relationship of Schedoni with im« 
semicircular range of rocks that rose over conquerable affright. The first emotions his 
the convent and formed a part of the domain, appearance had excited were so opposite to 
the prospects were infinitelv finer. They ex- those of filial tenderness that she perceived It 
tended on the south to the Isle of Capri, was now nearly impossible to love and revere 
where the gulf expands into the sea ; in the him as her father ; and she endeavoured, by 
west appeared the island of Ischia, dis- dwelling upon all the obligations which she 
tlni^iished by the white pinnacles of the lofty believed he had lately conferred upon her, to 
mountain Epomeo ; and near it Profida, with repay him in gratitude what was withheld in 
its many-coloured difis, rose out of the waves, affection. 

Overlooking several points towards Puzzuoli, In such melancholy considerations she 
the eye caught, beyond other promontories, often lingered under the shade of the acacias 
and others furUier still to the north, a glimpse till the sim had sunk behind the far distant 
of the sea, that bathes the now desolate shores promontory of Miseno, and the last bell of 
of BaJas ; with Capua, and all the towns and vespers summoned her to the convent below. 
villas that speckle the garden-plains between Among the nuns Ellena bad many fa.- 
Caserta and Naples. vourites, but not otie V\\aX ^^^ ^mxu^ viA 

In tb« tmrpr 9cene wen the rocky heights loved eqvnUy ^rixh QUm ^ ^AXL^V(li3»xQ« ^^ 



ip 



THE ITALIAN. 



remembrance of whom was always accom- 
panied with a fear lest she should have suf- 
fered from her generous compassion, and a 
wish that she had taken up her abode with 
the happy society of the Daushters of Pity 
instead of being subjected to the tyranny of 
the abt)ess of San Stefano. To Ellena, the 
magnificent stenes of La Pieta seemed to 
open a secure and, ptrrhaps, a last asylum ; 
for, in her present circiimstances, she could 
not avoid perceiving how menacng and 
various were the objections to her marriage 
with Vivaldi, even should Schedoni prove 
propitious to it. The character of the Mar- 
chf SI di Vivaldi, such as it stood unfolded by 
the late occurrences, struck her with dismay ; 
for her designs appeared sufficiently atro- 
cious, whether they had extended to the 
utmost limit of Ellena's suspicions or had 
stopped where the affected charity of Sche- 
doni had pointed out. In either case, the 
l)crtioacity of her aversion and the vindic- 
tive violence of her nature were obvious. 

In this view of her character, however, it 
was not the inconvenience threatened to those 
who might become connected with her that 
principally aifected Ellena, but the circum- 
stance of such a woman being the mother of 
Vivaldi ; and, to alleviate so afflicting a con- 
sideration, she endeavoured to believe all the 
palliating suggestions of Schedoni respecting 
the Marchesa's late intentions. But, if Ellena 
was grieved on discovering crime in the cha- 
racter of Vivaldi's parent, what would have 
been her suffering had she suspected the 
nature of Schedoni ? — what if she had been 
told that he was the adviser of the Marchesa's 
plans? — if she had known that he had been 
ihe partner of her intentional guilt? From 
such suffering she was yet spared, as well as 
from that which a knowledge of Vivaldi's 
present situation, and of the result of Sche- 
doni's efforts to procure a release from the 
perils among which he had precipitated him, 
would have mflicted. Had she known this, 
it is possible that in the first despondency 
of her mind she would have relinquished 
what is called the world, and sought a lasting 
asylum with the society of the holy sisters. 
]'2ven as it was, she sometimes endeavoured 
to look with resignation upon the events 
which might render such a step desirable ; 
but it was an effort that seldom soothed her, 
even with a temporary self-delusion. Should 
the veil, however, prove her final r'-fuge, it 
would be by her own choice ; ft r the lady 
abbess of La Pieta employed no art to win 
a recluse, nor sufitered the nuns to seduce 
votaries to the order. 



soned in distinct chambers of the Inqiilrilta. 
They were again separately iniem|nli& 
From the servant no infonnation oowd-be 
obtained ; he asserted only hb mutor's Ibbd- 
cence, without once remembering hbowi; 
clamoured, with more justness thaBpradeDfitg' 
against the persons who had occasioiicd U| 
arrest; and, seriously endeavouring to convifiCd 
tlie inquisitors that he himself bad no oU^ 
motive in having demanded to be b rting fa t to 
these prisons than that he might comfort Idi 
master, he gravcl)r remonstrated on the In^ 
justice of separating them, adding tbaX te 
was sure when they knew the lights of dM 
matter, they would order him to be carrilSd 10 
the prison of Signor Vivaldi. 

" I do assure your Serenissimo IHnstflf- 
simo," continued Paulo, addre^dng the cUef 
inquisitor with profoimd gravity, "that tUlb 
the last place I should have thought of oomiB|^ 
to on any other account ; and Uytm will o^ 
condescend to ask your officials who toodt ittf 
master up, they will tell you as gpod, Thi^ 

nhA 



CHAPTER XXVI. 
"HILE the late events had been passing 
,_,. 'i» /A<? Garganus and at Naples, Vi- 
valdjandhis servant Paulo remained impri- 



W 



knew well enough all along what I 

for ; and if they had known it would beall.t^ 

vain, it would have been but civil of them to 

have told me as much, and not have iMOHiABl 

me : for this is the last place in the worid l 

would have come to, otherwise, of niy ^ 

accord." 

Paulo was permitted to harangue In hb i 
way. because his examiners hoped tN^.Uk 
prolixity would be a means of betraying d^ 
cumstances connected with his roaster. By 
this view, however, they were misled, for Pndo^ 
with all his simplicity of heart, was .liodl 
vigilant and shrewd in Vival^'s intCKi^ 
But, when he perceived them really cuu f t aced 
that his sole motive for visiting thjeflnqnidlkMl 
was that he might console his master, ytt 
still persisting in the resolution of sepaklte^ 
confming him, his indignatfoft faiev iio 
bounds. He despised alike thefr i e pr p h ei ttl g U t 
their thundering menaces, and thefar itidilB 
artful exhibitions ; told them of all they Iwd 
to expect both here and hereafter, for tbiA 
cruelty to his dear master, and said thi^ 
might do what they would with him'; he 
defied them to make him more miserable thni 
he was. 

It was not without difficulty that he was 
removed from the chamber ; where he left Um 
examiners in a state of astonishment at his 
rashness, and indignation of his honesty, snch 
as they had, probably, nevtr experienoed 
before. 

When Vivaldi was again called up to the 
table of the Holy Offii:e, he tmderwent a 
longer examination than on a former occasioQ. 
Several inquisitors attended, and every ^rt 
was employed to induce him to confess crimes 
of which he was suspected, and to dntw ftolki 
him a discovery of others which mjght hsio 
eluded even suspicion. Still the omhlnais 
caul\o\i^\y a.\Q\d^ VTi^ottcvVn^i^ V&csk q^ Um l«h» 



THE ITALIAN, 



Ml 



iect of the aocnsation on which he had been 
arrested ; and it was, therefore, only on the 
former assomnoes of the Benedictine and the 
officials in the ^apd of San Sebastian, that 
VinUdi tmderstooa be was accused of having 
carried off a nun. His answers on the present 
occasion were concise and firm, and his whole 
deportment undaunted. IJe felt less appre- 
hension for himself than indignation of the 
Ceral injustice and cruelty which the tri- 
al was permitted to exercise upon others; 
and this virtuous indignation ^ave a loftiness, 
a calm heroic grandeur to his mind, which 
never for a moment forsook him, except 
wfaoa he conjectured what might be the suiTer- 
ii^gs of EUena. Then his fortitude and mag- 
nanimity failed, and his tortured spirit rose 
almost to frenzy. 

On this, his second examination, he was 
urged by the same dark questions, and replied 
to them with the same open sincerity, as dur- 
ing the first. Yet the simplicity and energy 
of truth failed to impress conviction on minds 
wUch, no longer possessing the virtue them- 
advei, were not competent to understand the 
s y mp to ms of it in others. Vivaldi was again 
threatened with the torture, and again dis- 
missed to his prison. 

On the way to this dreadful abode, a person 
passed Um in one of the avenues, of whose 
air arid figure he thought he had some re- 
collection : and as the stranger stalked away, 
he suddenly knew him to be the prophetic 
monk who had haunted the ruins of Paluzzi. 
In the first moment of surprise, Vivaldi lost 
bis presence of mind so far that he made no 
attevnpt to interrupt him. In the next instant, 
however, be paused and looked back, with an 
faitention of speaking ; but this mysterious 
person was already at the extremity of the 
avenue. Vivaldi, however, called and besought 
him to st(^; when, without either speaking 
or turning his head, he immediately dis- 
appeared b^ond a door that opened at his 
approadi. \lvaldi, on attempting to take the 
way Off the monk, was withheld by his guards ; 
and when he inquired who was the stranger 
he had seen, the officials asked, in their turn, 
what stranger he alluded to. 

"He who has just passed us," replied 
VivBkli. 

The ofiicials seemed surprised. "Your 
spirits are disordered, signor," observed one 
of them, " I saw no person pass ! " 

" He passed so closely," said Vivaldi, " that 
it was hardly possible you could avoid seeing 
him 1 " 

" I did not even hear a footstep I " added 
the man. 

" I do not recollect that I did," answered 
Vivaldi, " but I saw his figure as plainly as I 
now see yours; his black garments almost 
tondied me 1 Was he an inquisitor ? " 

The official appeared astonished ; and, 
whetber hjs incredylity ww real, pr aflfectcd 



for the purpose of conceaUng his knowledge 
of the person alluded to, his embarrasiment 
and awe seemed natural. Vivaldi observed. 
with almost equal curiosity and surprise, the 
fear which his face expressed ; but perceived 
also that it would avail nothing to repeat his 
questions. 

As they proceeded along the avenue, a kind 
of half-stined groan was sometimes audible 
from a distance. "Wh<nce come ihose 
sounds?" said Vivaldi ; "they strike to my 
heart!" 

" They should do so," replied th*» guJircL 

"Whence come they?" repeated Vivaldi, 
more impatiently, and shuddering. 

"From the place of torture," said the 
official. 

"Oh, God ! oh. God ! " exclaimed Vivaldi, 
with a deep groan. 

He passed with hasty step? the door of that 
terrible chamber, and the gu.ird did not 
attempt to stop him. The officials had 
brougnt him, in obedience to the customary 
orders they had received, within hearing of 
those doleful sounds, for the purpose of im- 
pressing upon his mind the horrors of the 
punishment with which he was threatened, 
and of inducing him to con Toss without in- 
curring them. 

On this same evening Vivaldi was visited 
in h s prison by a man whom he hjid never 
consciously seen before. Pie a: peered to be 
between forty and fifty ; was of a ^rave and 
observant physiognomy, and of manners 
which, though somewhat austere, were not 
alarming. The account he gave of himself 
and of his motive for this visit was curious. 
He said that he also was a prisoner in the 
Inquisition, but, as the ground of acciL«ation 
against him was light, he had been favoured 
so fer as to be allowed some degree of liberty 
within certain bounds ; that having heard of 
Vivaldi's situation, he bad asked and obtained 
leave to converse with him, which he had 
done in compassion, and with a desire of 
assuaging his sufferings, so far as an expres- 
sion of sympathy and commiseration might 
relieve them. 

While he spoke, Vivaldi regarded him with 
deep attention, and the improbability that 
these pretensions should be true did not 
escape him ; but the suspicion which they 
occasioned he prudenUy concealed. The 
stranger conversed on various subjects. Vival- 
di's answers were cautious and concise ; but 
not even long pauses of silence wearied the 
compassionate patience of his visitor. Among 
other topics he at length introduced that of 
religion. 

" I have myself been accused of heresy," 
said he, "and know how to pity others in the 
same situation." 

" It is of heresy, then, that I am accused ! " 
observed VivaMi. " of heresy ! " 



143 Tira ITAUAN. 

Innocence," continued the Btiannr, wttboat valdlto Kdit the tan^lBtlon vawtMixtA.it 

noticing Vivaldi's exclamation, "I irai con- him ; and the itntiEer, having received hit 

demncd to the torture. My suSeriogs were thaoia, reluctBDl^ Wuhdi'Ew, observing, how- 

loa letiible to be endured ! I confeised my ever, thatshould u^ tinforeseea circumstiince 

ofiince " delain him in (he Inqiunimn longer than lis 

"Pardon me," interrupted Vivaldi, "but had wason to tipect, he should beg leave to 

iillow me to remark that, since your suAeiingg pa; him another vliiL lareply to thi^ Vi- 

!~you[S, against whom the valdi only bowed ; but he remarked that the 

„ . iaiion WIS light, what may be stiaDger'scoimteiianeealteied, itnd Ihatsome 

the punishment of those whose offences are dark brooding appealed to doud his mitid as 

more Eerious ? " he quitted the chamber. , 

The stranger was somewhat embaimssed. Several days elapied, daring which Vhddi 

"My olf«Dce was slight," he continued, heard no tnoie of his newacquaimance. H« 

without giving a fiJl answer. was then jummor-" -■' '- ■' — 

"Is it possible," said Vivaldi, again inter- from which he wi „ ,, 

rupting him. "that heresy can be considered some weeks of solitude and i^ bsavf v 

OS a slight offence before the tribunal of the lainty succeeded, aner which be wai afbuiiu 

Inquisition 7 " time called up to the table of the Holy OAue. 

"It was only a slight degree of heresy," It was then surrounded b^ itignisitoi^ and a 

replied thevisitor.rcdidening wilhdispleasure, more than usual solenmity appeared in tha 

" of which I was suspected, and " proceedings. 

" Does, then, the Inquisition allow of de- As proofs of Vivaldi's innoeence had.iMt 

gren in heresy? "said Vivaldi. beenobtained,thesusiHcioiisofllis«xaiaia«l, 

"I confessed my offence;" added the of course, were not removed; and •• b* 

alranger, with a louder emphasis, "and the persisted in lienying the tnith^thsd 

coosetjiicace of (his confession was a remis- which he understood would be wW 

sion of punishment. After a trifling penauce against him, and refused to make any n 

" "— ■■- — ■— ed, and probably in a few *■ — - — -' —- " — ■— j -i- . 



days leave the prison. Before I left it I was should, within three houn, be put. to Uts 

desirous of administering some degree of ( '' "^ -■-■••• 

consolation to a fellow-suffirrer : if you have c 



Till then Vivaldi s 



. ^ Is whom you wish lo inform of your tion remained unshaken, 

situation, do not fear to conlide their names look unmoved upon the hontns irtiidi jni^ 

and your message to me." be preparing for him. The inlarntl of MpM- 

The latter part of the speech was delivered lalion between the sentence and the weetnr 

in a low voice, as if the stranger feared to be plishment of this preUminaiy ponishnMnf «M 

overheard. Vivaldi reic:uned silent, while he mdeed dreadful. TTm «j»imin|f ijann.inj ^ 

c^iamined with closer attention the counten- his situation, and hii ignorance a* to tte 

ance of bis visitor. It was of the utmost im- degree of tortiu« to he applied, orercamabe 

portance to him that tiis family should be calmness he had before exhiUted, and ■■ b 

made acquainted with his situation ; yet he raced his cell, cold damps, which hubf imcHl 

knew not exactly how to interpret, or to con- his forehead, betrayedtheogODy of hJBiUBd* 

fide in, this ofTer. Vivaldi had heard that It was not long, however, that ha MOtred 

informers sometimes vi^ted the prisoners, from a sense of ignominy ; his better i<)dB' 

and, undir the affectation of kitidness and raent showed him that innocence cannot m£r 

sym^thy, drew from them a confes^on of disgrace from any situation or circuioitanca : 

opinions, which wereafterwardsurgedagainst and he once more resumed the counifie and 

them ; and obtained discoveries relative to the tnmness which belong to virtue. 

[heir connections and friends, who were, .by 11 was about midnight that Viv&kSi heard 

these insidious means, frequently involvedio footsteps approaching, and a munuor of 

their destruction. Vivaldi, conscious of hjs voices at the door of his cell. Bs undostood 

own innocence, hadi on the first examination, by these that persons were coming to mmiBan 

acquainted the inquisitor with the names and him to the torture. The door was untMumtL 

residence of his family ; he had, therefore, and two rnsn, habited in bltwk, appeared at 

nothing new to apprehend from revealing it. Without speaking they advaoqnl, and, 

them to this stranger ; but he pcrcdvvd that throwing over him a singular kind of mantle, 

if it should be known he had attempted to led- him from the chamKr. 

convey a message, however concise and Along the galleries and other avanntt 

harmless, the discovery would irritate the througli which they passed, not any penon 

jealous lnqui:,itors against him, and might be was seeij, and. by the proioimd stilines* that 

urEcd as a new presumption of his guilt, reigned,' i) seemed as if death had alreadr 

These considerations, togeth^ with the dis- anOcipated his work in these region! cf 

trust which the inconiisiencv of his visitor's horror, and. had condemned alike tb« tor- 

assertlons and the occasional embarrassment tur&i and the. torturer. 

of his manner bad ewiled, determined Vi- They descended to the large hall, when 



THE ITALIAN. 



M3 



^Hvakll hftd wiited on the night of his en- 
trance, and tbanoa through an avenue and 
down a long fflMit of steps that led to sub- 
terranean ^amoen. His conductors did not 
utter a fy^Uable dnrlng the whole progress ; 
Vivaldi Imeir too well that questions would 
only subject him to greater severity, and he 
asked none. 

The doors thnxigh which they piissed re- 
gularly opened at the touch of an iron rod, 
carried by one of the officials, and without 
the appearance of any person. The other 
man bore a tordi, and the passages were so 
dimly lighted that the way could scarcely 
have be^ foond vnthout one. They crossed 
what seemed to be a burial vault, but the 
extent aikid obscnrity of the place did not 
allow it to be ascertained ; and. having 
reached ah iron door, they stopped. One 
of the offidals struck upon it three times 
with the rodt but it did not open as the others 
had done. ' While they waited, Vivaldi 
thought he heard, from within, low inter- 
mitting sounds, as of persons in their last 
extremity, but, though within, they appeared 
to come from a distance. His whole heart 
¥fas chilled, not with fear, for at that moment 
he did not remember himself, but with horror. 

Having waited a considenible time, during 
which the official did not repeat the signal, 
the door was partly opened by a figure whom 
Vivaldi could not distinguish in the gloom 
beyond, and with whom one of his con- 
ductors communicated by signs ; after which 
the door was closed. 

Several minutes had elapsed when tones of 
deep voices aroused the attention of Vivaldi. 
They were loud and hoarse, and spoke in a 
language unknown to him. At the sounds, 
tS^- official immediately extinguished his 
to^h. The voices drew nearer, and, the 
dodr again unfolding, two figures stood be- 
fore. Vivaldi, which, shown by a glimmering 
light''' within, struck him with astonishment 
9xA dismay. .They wo'e clothed, like his con- 
ductoirs, in black, but in a different fashion, 
iat their habits were made close to the shape. 
Their faces were entirely concealed beneath 
a veiy pechliar kind of cowl which descended 
from the head to the feet ; and their eyes 
only were visible through small openings con- 
trived for the' sight. It occurred to Vivaldi 
that these men were torturers ; their appear- 
ance was worthy of demons. Probably they 
were thus habited that the persons whom 
they afflicted might not know them ; or, per- 
haps, it was only for- the purpose of striking 
terror upon the minds of the accused, and 
thus compelling them to confess without fur- 
ther difficulty. Whatever motive might have 
ocattioned - their horrific appearance, and 
whatever was their office, Vivaldi was de- 
livered into their hands, and in ■ the same 
ntoment heard the iron door shut, which 
enclosed him with them in a narrow passage, 



gloomily lighted by a l.imp stLSpendod from 
the arched roof. They walked in silence on 
ftich side of their prist mut. and i:atiii; in a 
second door which admi'ied them in-t.uitly 
into anothiT passaij^c. A third door, a' ;t 
short distance, admiitt^ them to a tiurd 
avenue, at the end of which one of Ins 
mysterious guides struck upon a gate, ami 
thr:y stopixsd. The uncertain suuiHii lliat 
Vivaldi had fancied he hc.ml wirre now more 
.audible, and he dis(in;;ui:ihcil, with inexpres- 
sible horror, that thfy were uttered by j^cr- 
SODS suffering. 

The gate was, at length, opened liy a figure 
habited like his conductors, and two other 
doors of iron, placed very near each (jthiT, 
being also unlocked, Vivaldi found himself in 
a spacious chamber, the walls of which were 
hung with black, duskily lighttrd by l.iini.s, 
that gleamed in the lofty vault. Iinniedialely 
on his entrance, a strange sound run along 
the walls, and echoed among oilier vauiLs, 
that appearefl, by the progress of the sound, 
to extend far beyond thi.s. 

It was not immediately that Vivaldi could 
sufticicnlly recollect himself to ohsnvc .my 
object before him ; and evm wln'ii he did mi, 
the gloom of the place prevciitt'd his asi-i-rt.iin- 
ing many appearances. Sh.ulowy counten- 
ances and uncertain forms &oemed to flit 
through the dusk, and many instruments, the 
application of which he did not comprehend, 
struck him with horrible suspicions. Still he 
heard, at intervals, half stippressed groans, and 
was looking round to discover the wretched 
people from whom they wi;rf* extorted, when 
a voice from a remote p.irt of the chamber 
called on him to advamv. 

The distance, and the obscurity of tin: spot 
whencs the voice issued had prevented Vivaldi 
from noticing any person there, and lu; was 
now slowly olieying ; when, on a second sum- 
mons, his conductors seized his arms, and 
hurried him forward. 

In a remote part of this extensive chamber 
he perceived three persons seated under a 
black canopy, on chairs raised several steps 
from the floor, and who appeared to preside 
there in the office of either judges or exa- 
miners, or directors of the punishments. 
Below, at a tible. sat a secretary, over whom 
was suspended the only lamp, that could 
enable him to commit to paper what should 
occur during the examination. Vivaldi now 
understood that the three persons who com- 
posed the tribunal were; the vicar-gcneral, or 
grand inquisitor, the advocate of the ex- 
chequer, and an ordinary inquisitor, who was 
seated between the other two, and who 
appeared more eagerly to engage in the duties 
of his cruel office. A portentous obscurity 
enveloped alike their persons and their pro- 
ceedings. 

At some distance from the tribunal stood a 
large iron frame, yjYiVOa \'\n;M\ twxYiiQNjxt'e.^ 



144 ^^^ ITALIAN. 

to be the rack; and near it another, reaenbling Vivaldi to confess liimself fUll^; Md Uw 

in shape a coffin ; but happily he could not inquisitor, at length concluded wtth nybv* 

distinguish, through the remote obscurity, that the judgM were innocent of vhatefcr 

any person undergoing actual suffering. In consequence might ensue from bis obtfiaaqf ; 

the vaults beyond, however, the diabolical so that, if he expired beneath his suflGBfinglb 

decrees of the inquisitors seemed to be ful- himself only, not they* would haveoocaitoued 

filling ; for, whenever a distant door opened his death. 

for a moment, sounds of lamentation issued " I am innocent of the charges which I 

forth ; and men. vihom he judged to be fa- understand are urged against me," aeU 

miliars, habited like those who stood beside Vivaldi, with solemnity ; "I repeat that I 

him. were seen passing to and fro within. am innocent. If, to escape the boixoiV of 

Vivaldi almost believed himself in the in- these moments, I could be weak eBQa|(h to 

femal regions; (he dismal aspect of this declare myself guilty, not all your ndu coiiki 

place, the horrible preparation for punishment, alter truth, and miJie me so, except in .that 

and, above all. the disposition and appearance assertion. The consequence of your i o rim e s 

of the persons that were ready to inflict it, therefore, be upon yoor own heads I " 

confirmed the resemblance. That any human While Vivaldi spoke the vicar-gencnl 

being should willingly afflict a fellow-being listened with attention, and when he had 

who had never injur^ or even offended him ; ceased to speak, appeared to meditate.; hot 

that, unswayed by passion, he should delibe- the inquisitor was irritated by the boldnenaC 

rately become the means of torturing him, his speech, instead of being convinced by the 

appeared to Vivaldi nearly incredible. But, justness of his representation ; and made a 

when he looked at the three persons who com- signal for the officers to prepare for thejncci^ 

posed the tribunal, and considered that they tion. While they were obeying, ^^valm ob- 

had nor only voluntarily undertaken the cruel served, notwithstanding the agitation he 

office they fulfilled, but had probably long suffered, a person cross the chamber, whom 

regarded it as the summit of their ambition, he immediately knew to be the same that had 

his astonishment and indignation were un- passed h>m in the avenue of the InquisitioD 

bounded. on a former night, and whom he had then 

The grand inquisitor, having again calltd fancied to be the mysterious stranger of 

on Vivaldi by name, admonish^ him to con- Paluzzi. Vivaldi now fixed his eyes apoa 

fess the truth, and avoid the suffering that him, but his own peculiar situation prevented 

awaited hi m . his feeling the interest he had formerly auffeied 

As Vivaldi had on former examinations concerning him. 

spoken the truth, which was not believed, he The figure, air, and stalk, of this person 

had no chance of escaping present suffering were so striking, and so strongly resembled 

but by asserting falsehood : in doing so, to those of the monk of Paluud, that Vivaldi 

avoid such monstrous injustice and cruelty, he had no longer a doubt as to their identity. 

might, perhaps, have been justified, had it He pointed him out to one of the offiriais^ 

been certain that such assertion could affect and inquired who he was. Wl^e he mks^ 

himself alone ; but since he knew that the the stranger was passing forward, ana b^ 

consequence must extend to others, and, above fore any teply was given, a door leading lo 

all, believed that Ellena di Rosalba must be the further vaults shut him from view. iTt- 

involved in it, he did not hesitate for an in- valdi, however, repeated the inquiry, whvdi 

stant to dare whatever torture his firmness the official a|:92eared unable to answer* end a 

might provoke. But, even if morality could reproof from the tribunal reminded hhn that 

have forgiven falsehood in such extraordinary he must not ask questions there. Vivaktt 

circumstances as these, policy, after all, would observed that it was the grand inquisitor who 

have forbidden it ; since a discovery of the spoke, and that the manner of the official 

artifice would probably have led to the final immediately changed, 

destruction of the accused person. The familiars, who were the same that had 

Of EUena's situation he would now have conducted Vivaldi into the chamber, having 
asked, however desperate the question ; would made ready the instrument of torture, ap- 
again have asserted her innocence, and suppli- proached him, and, after taking off his doak 
cated for compassion, even to inquisitors, had and vest, bound him with strong cords. They 
he not perceived that, in doing so, he should threw over bis head the customary bladt gar- 
only furnish them with a more exquisite means ment, which entirely enveloped his figure, and 
of torturing him than any other they could prevented his observing what was further 
apply ; for if. when all the terrors of his soul preparing. In this state of expectation be was 
concerning her were understood, they should again interrelated by the inquisitor, 
threaten to increase her sufferings, as the " Were you ever in the church of the Spirito 
punishment of what was termed his obstinacy, Santo, at Naples ? " said he. 
they would, indeed, become the masters of his " Yes, " replied Vivaldi, 
jnteigrity, as well as of his person. " Did you ever express there a contempt of 
The tribunal again, and repeatedly, urg^ the Catholic Cuth? " 



THE ITALIAN, 



«4S 



*' Nem." Mid l^nddL 

" Ndthcr fay woid nor action? " continued 
tb« inquiiitor. 

"Neter. by cither 1" 

** Recollect yourself," added the inquisitor. 
*' Did ytfx never insult there a minister of our 
most h<d^ Chuidi ? " 

VivakU was silent : he began to perceive 
the real nature of the charge which was to be 
meed against him, and tlut it was too plau- 
aime to permit his escape from the punish- 
ment which is adjudged for heresy^ Ques- 
ttODS so direct and minute had never yet been 
pot to him : they had been reserved for a 
moment when it was believed he could not 
evade them ; and the real charge had been 
concealed firom him that he might not be 
prepared to elude it 

* ' Answer 1 " repeated the iuquisitor. * ' Did 
yon ever insult a minister of the Catholic 
ndth in the church of the Spirito Santo, at 
Naples?" 

'* Did you not insult him while he was per- 
ibnning an act of holy penance ? " said an- 
other voice. 

^valdi started, for be instantly recollected 
the well-known tones of the monk of Paluzzi. 

"Who asks the question?" demanded 
Vivaldi. 

" It ii you who are to answer here," re- 
soroed the inquisitor. " Answer to what I 
baive required." 

" I have offisnded a minister of the Church, " 
iieplied VivaUi, " but never could intentionally 
iBfiilt our holy religion. You are not ac- 
quainted, fathers, with the injuries that pro- 



•< 



Enough I " interrupted the inquisitor ; 
"speak to the question. Did you not, by 
insoU and menace, force a pious brother to 
leave nnperformed the act of penance in 
vfaldK he had engaged himself? Did you not 
compel him to quit the church, and fly for 
refuge to his convent ? " 

"No." replied Vivaldi. '"Tis true, he 
left the church, and that in consequence of 
my conduct there ; but the consequence was 
not necessary ; if he had only replied to my 
inquiry, kx promised to restore her of whom 
he had treacherously robbed roe, he might 
have remained quietly in the church till Uiis 
moment, had that depended upon my foir- 



" What 1 " said the vicar-general, " would 
yoo have compelled him to speak when he was 
engaged in silent penance ? You confess that 
yon occasioned him to leave the church. 
That is enough." 

"Where did you first see Ellena di Ro- 
?" said the voice which had spoken 



" I demand again, who gives the question?" 
■Btwered Vivaldi. 

"Recollect youndf," said the inquisitor ; 
"a oiminal may not make* demand." 



" I do not peiceive the connection between 
your admonition and your assertion," ob- 
served VivaMi. 

*' You appear to be rather too much at your 
ease." said the inquisitor. "Answer to the 
ouestion which was last put to you, or the 
fiuniiiars shall do their duty." 

"Let the same person ask it," replied 
VivaldL 

The question was repeated in the former 
voice. 

" In the church of 5>an I^orenso, at Napli s," 
rejoined Vivaldi, with a heavy sigh, " I first 
beheld Ellena di Rosalba." 

" Was she then professed 1 " ukcd tlic 
vicar-general. 

"She never accepted the veil." replied 
Vivaldi, " nor ever intended to do so." 

" Where did she reside at that period ? " 

"SheUved with a relative at Villa Aliicri, 
and would yet reside there, had not the 
machinations of a monk occasioned her to be 
torn from her home, and confined in a con- 
vent, fiom which I had Just assisted to release 
her, \^hen she was again seized, and upon a 
charge most false and cruel. Oh, reverend 

fathers 1 I conjure, I supplicate " Vivaldi 

rtstrained himself, for he was betraying to 
to inquisitors all the feelings of his heart. 

' ' The name of the monk ? " said the stranger 
earnestly. 

" If I mistake not," replied Vivaldi, " you 
are already acquainted with it. The monk 
is called Father Schedoni. He is of the 
Dominican convent of the Spirito Santo, in 
Naples : the same who accuses me of having 
insulted him in the church of that name." 

" How did you know him for your ac- 
cuser ? " asked the same voice. 

"Because he is my only enemy," replied 
Vivaldi. 

" Your enemy ) " observed the inquisitor ; 
"a former deposition says you were uncon- 
scious of having one I You are inconsistent 
in your replies." 

"You were warned not to visit Villa Al- 
tieri." said the unknown person. " Why did 
you not profit by the warning ? " 

"I was warned by yoiurself," answered 
Vivaldi. " Now I know you well ? " 

" By me 1 " said the stranger, in a solemn 
tone. 

" By you I " repeated Vivaldi : "you, uho 
also foretold the death of Signora Bianchi ; 
and you are that enemy — r hat father Schedoci 
by whom I am accused." 

"Whence come these questions?" de- 
manded the vicar-general. " Who has been 
authorised thus to interrogate the prisoner ? " 

No reply was noade. A busv hum of voices 
from the tribunal succeeded the silence. At 
length, the murmuring subsided, and the 
monk's voice was heardf again. 

" I will dedare thus much, " it said, ^<1\«lv 
ing Vivaldi ; ** 1 un bi^ 1«xYmx ^tetit&fcitsir 



146 THE ITAUAI9. 

The peculiar tone and emphasis with which were now connected in his mind« with the 

this was ddivered, more than the assertion certainty of Schedoni's evil disposltioa tb- 

itself, persuaded Vivaldi that the stranger wards liim, the more he was indnoMd to be*( 

spoke truth ; and though he still recognised lieve, notwithstanding; the voice V>f eeedilfig 

tne voice of the monk of Paluzzi, he did not truth which had just affirmed the ooatnry, 

know it to be that of Schedoni. Vivaldi was that the unknown person was Sdiedoni hlm- 

astonished 1 He would have torn the veil self, and that he had been empHayed br llw 

from his eyes, and once more viewed this Marchesa to prevent Vivaldi's- visits toimia 

mysterious stranger, had his hands been at Altieri. Being ti[iu8 an agent in the events of 

liberty. As it was, he could only conjure him which he had wanied "^vakli, he mi too 

to reveal his name and the motives for his well enabled to predict them. Vivaldi pauBBd 

former conduct. upon the remembrance of Signora Biandii^ 

* ' Who is come amongst us ? " said the death ; he considered the extraordinaiT udk 

vicar-general, in the voice of a person who dubious circumstances that liad attenoedit, 

means to inspire others with the awe he him- and shuddered as a new conjectnce cnand 

self suffers. his mind. The thought was too **«iMb4 

"Who is come amongst us?" he repeated, to be permitted, and he dismissed it ii^ 

in a louder tone. Still no answer was re- stantly. 

turned ;butagainaconfused murmur sounded Of the conversation, however, wlikh he 

from the tribunal, and a general consternation had afterwards held with the coofessor in tiia 

seemed to prevail. No person spoke with Marchesa's cabinet he lecollected- many |Miw 

sufficient pre-eminence to be understood by ticulars that served to renew his doubfa ai ttf 

Vivaddi ; something extraordinary appeared the identity of the stranger ; the beluiViMir'of 

to be passing, and he waited the issue with all Schedoni when he was obliquely cfaaUengwl 

the patience he could command. Soon for the monk of Paluzzi stUl appeared that b£ 

after he heard doors opened, and the noise of a man unconscious of diq^iidae-; and, above 

people quitting the chamber. A deep silence all, Vivaldi was struck with the seemiaff ean^ 

followed ; but he was certain that the familiars dour of his having pointed out a cucum- 

were still beside him, waiting to begin their stance which removed the probability that 

work of torture. .. . • the stranger 4(msra lHt>ther o»-tbe Santa del 

After a considerable time had elapsed, Pianto. 

Vivaldi heard footsteps advancing, and a Some particulars, also, of the strann'a 

person give orders for his release, that he conduct did not zigc^t with what migfatntfve 

might be carried back to his cell. been expected from Schedotti,. even thouglr 

When the veil was removed from his eyes, the confessor had. r»UIy been Vivaldi'j' 

he perceived that the tribunal was dissolved, enemy ; a circumstance which the laUer was 

and that the stranger was gone. The lamps no longer permitted to doubt Nor did thoee 

were d3ring away, and the chamber appeared particular circumstances accord, ae te was 

more gloomily terrific than before. inclined to t)elieve, wiUi the manner ef > s 

The familiars conducted him to the spot at being of this world ; and, idien Vivaldi coBi 

which they had received him ; whence the sidered the suddenness and- myiteiy wlA 

officers who had led him thither guarded him which the stranger had always appeared and 

to his prison. There, stretched upon his retired, he felt disposed to adopt sigain ooftol 

bed of straw, in solitude and in darkness, he his earliest conjectures, which undoubfeeiUy 

had leii^ure enough to reflect upon what had the horrors of his present lUiode disftoscd'Ui 

passed, and to recollect with minute exact- imagination to admit,, as those of.bisfiiniMr 

ness every former circumstance connected situation in the vaults of Paluzzi,^ tegethv 

with the stranger. By comparing those with with a youthful glow of curiosity ooncemi^ 

the present, he endeavoured to draw a more the marvellous, had before oontribttfied •%» 

certain conclusion as to the identity of this impress upon his mind. . ; 

person, and his motives for the very extra- He concluded his present reflections ja he 

ordinary conduct he had pursued. The first had begun them— in doubt and pierpleKity.i 

appearance of this stranger among the ruins but at length found a respite from, tfaoc^tt 

of Paluzzi, when he had said that Vivaldi's and from suffering in sleep, 

steps were watched, and had cautioned him Midnight had l)een. passed in the vaolts 

against returning to Villa Altieri, was recalled of the Inquisition ; but it was probabhr noi 

to his mind. Vivaldi reconsidered, also, his yet two o'clock when he was. Impenecdy 

second appearance on the same spot, and his awakened by a sound, which he &noied:pcx>- 

second warning ; the circumstances which ceeded from within his cbamber. iie laned 

had attended his own adventures within the himself to discover what had oocBsiOnedibs 

fortress, the monk's {prediction of Bianchi's noise ; it was, however, impossitde to dSacsm 

death, and his evil tidings respecting EUena any object, for nil was xlanr/ibtt he Ustfcned 

at the very hour when she had been seized for a return of the sound. :.Tlie \rilB4-«idr 

and Carrie^ from her home. The longer he was heard moaning iimonff ther inner- fanilcf- 

conskiered these Bever&l instances, as they ings of the pvison,' «nd Vivaldi xoochidcd 



THB iTAUAN. 147 

that faUdrcam had mocked him with a mimic Vivaldi wai iCnick by the tone with which 
voice. > ' he said this, and dared not to urge the in- 
Satisfied with this condtuion, lie again quiry at the present moment, 
laid Us head on his pillow of straw, and soon *' How long have you known father Sche- 
aank illta a slumber. The subject of his doni?" continued the stranger ; "Where did 
.waking thoughts still haunted his imagina- you first meet ? 

tloii,.and the stranger, whose voice he had "I have known him about two years, as 

Ihia sight recognised as that of the prophet my mother's confessor/' replied Vivaldi. " I 

of Pahissi, appeared Ixfore him. Vivaldi, first saw him in a corridor of the Vivaldi 

on perceiving the figure of this unknown, palace ; it was evening, and he was returning 

ftlt, perhaps, nearly the same degree of awe, from the Man:hesa's closet." 

onriosiQrt and impatience that he would have " Are you certain as to this? said the monk, 

sufiRered had 1m beheld the substance of this with peculiar emphasis. "It is of consequence 

monk, whose face was siiU that you should be so." 



afaroaded; he thought advanced, till, having " I am certain," repeated Vivaldi. 
come within a few paces of Vivaldi, he "It is strange," observed the monk, after a 
paused, and, lifting the awfiil oowl that had pause, "that a circumstance which must 
hitherto concealed him, disclosed, not the iiave appeared trivial to you at the moment, 
countenance of Schedoni, but one which should have left so strong a mark on your 
Vivaldi did not recollect ever having seen memory ! In two years we have time to for- 
before I It was not less interesting to curio- get many things 1 " He sighed as he spoke. 
aity than striking to the feelings. Vivaldi, at "I remember the circumstance," said Vi- 
tbe fint glance, shrunk back— something of valdi, " because I was struck with his appear- 
that Btnnge and indescribable air which we ance ; the evening was far advanced— it was 
attach to the idea of a supernatural being dusk, and he came upon me suddenly. His 
prevailed over the features, and the intense voice startled me ; as he passed he said to 
and fiery eyes resembled those of an evil himself—'* It is for vespers." At the same 
rairit lauier than of a human character. He time I heard the bell of toe Spirito Santo." 
mm a poniard from beneath a fold of his " Do you know who be is ? " resumed the 
garment, and, as he displayed it, pointed stranger solemnly. 

with a stem frown to the spots which dis- " I know only what he appears to t)e,'* 
oohnned the blade ; Vivaldi perceived they replied Vivaldi. 

were of blood 1 He turned away his eyes in ' ' Did you never hear any report of his past 
honors and, when he again looked round in life ? " 
hia dieam, the figure was gone. " Never," answered Vivaldi 

A groan awakened him; but what were "Never anything extraordinary conoeming 
his fiselings when, on looking up, he per- him ? " added the monk, 
oeived the same figure standing before him 1 Vivaldi paused a moment ; for he now re- 
It was not, however, immediately that he collected the obscure and imperfect story 
could convince himself the appearance was which Paulo had related while they were con- 
more than the phantom of his dream strongly fined in the dungeon of Paluzzi, respecting a 
impressed upon an alarmed fiwcy. The voice confession made in the church of the Black 
of the monk, for his fiice was as usual con- Penitents ; but he could not presume to affirm 
coaled, recalled Vivaldi finom his error ; but that it concerned Schedoni. He remembered 
hia emotioo cannot eaaSky \m conceived, when also the monk's garments, stained with blood, 
the stranger, slowlv lifting that mysterious which he had discovered in the vaults of that 
cowl, discovered to him the same awml coun- fort. The conduct of the mysterious being, 
tenanoe which had characterised the vision in who now stood before him. with many other 
YSm slumber. Unable to inquire the occasion particulars of his own adventures there, passed 
of this appearance, Vivaldi gased in astonish- like a vision over his memory. His mind 
meat and terror, and did not immediately resembled the glass of a magician, on which 
observe that; instead of a dagger, the monlc the apparitions of long-buried events arise, 
held a lamp, which gleamed over every deep and as they fleet away, point portentously to 
fiizTOW of his features, yet left their shadowy shapes half veiled in the duskiness of futurity, 
maikings to hint the passions and the history An imusual dread seised upon him ; and a 
of on' extraordinary life. supostition, such as he had never before 

"Ycm are spared for this night," said admitted in an equal degree, usurped his judg- 
the stranger, ''but'fbr to-morrow"'— -he ment. He looked up to the shadowy coun- 
pguised. ... tenance of the stranger ; and almost believed 

*' In the name of all that is most sacred," he beheld an inhabitant of the world of 
said Vivaldi, endeavouring to re-collect his spirits. 

thoughts, " who are you, and what is your . The monk spoke again, repieating in a 
errand?" severer tone; "Did you never hear anythiti^ 

"Ask no questions," replied the monk, extraordinary conc&tu\i4ti^>Sh!a^(^<^<c^^^ 
solemnly ; " but answer tiur " Is it TaaoQBbVe;* ^mNVi^^Aik, xv^^K^^wfti- 



X48 THE iTAUAN. 

ing his courage, "that I should answer the Spirito SantOb at Nanles. When nm vs 

questions, the minute questions, of a peison asked who he is, reply* ' Ferando Comit di 

who refuses to tell me even his name? " Bruno.' Yott will t)e aodced tbei ittodve lor 

*' My name is passed away — it is no more such disguise. In replr to this, reftr ttan to 

remembert-d," replied the stranger, turning the Black Pwitents of the Santa Maria -dsl 

from Vivaldi. " I leave you to your fate." Pianto. near that city ; bid tha immUton 

" What fate? " asked Vivaldi, " and what summon before their tribunal one fiatfaer An- 

is the purpose of this visit? I conjure you, saldo di Rovaili, the grand. penitentlaiT of tfia 

in the tremendous name of the Inquisition, to society, and command him to dimlge the 

say 1 " crimes confessed to him in the year 175s, on 

" You will know full soon; have mercy on the evening of the twenty-fourth of And, 

yourself 1 " which was then the vigil of San Mazoo^ n a 

' ' What fate ? " repeated Vivaldi. confessional of the Santa del PianfiOL" . . 

" Urge me no further," said the stranger ; *' It is probable he may have f or g o tt afci 

"but answer to what I shall demand. Sche- confession, at this distance of time*" Obn 

doni " Vivaldi. 

" I have told all that I certainly know con- " Fear not but he will remember," repUad 

ceming him," interrupted Vivaldi ; "the rest the stranger, 

is only conjecture." ** But will his conscience auffier him fo 

" What is that conjecture ? Does it relate betray the secrets of a confession?" sidd 

to a confession made in the church of the Vivaldi. 

Black Penitents of the Santa Maria del *'The tribunal oommand, and hii om- 

Pianto?" science is absolved," answered the- moofci 

" It does 1 " replied Vivaldi, with surprise. " He may not refuse to obey. Yon are farther 

" What was that confession?" to direct your eyaminert to sanumm fttber 

" I know not," answered Vivaldi. Schedoni, to anflvi^er for the crinMM whiqb 

"Declare the truth," said the stranger, Ansaldo shall revesd." 

sternly. The monk paused, and seemed waiting tibe 

"Aconfesslon/'rcplied Vivaldi, "is sacred, reply of Vivaldi, who, after a moBBentafy 

and for ev( r buried in the bosom of the priest consideration, said, 

to whom it is made. How, then, is it to be 'How can I do all this, and i^xa tlse in* 

supposed that I can be acquainted with the stigation of a stranger? Neither '*TTWwriiMn 

subject of this? " nor prudence will suffer me to assert whet I 



"Did you never hear that father Schedoni cannot prove. It is true that I have 
had been guilty of great crimes, which he to believe Schedoni is my bitter enett|y, faftt 
endeavours to erase from his conscience by I will not be unjust even to him. I have no 
the severity of penance ? " proof that he is the Count di Bruno, nor that 

" Never ! " said Vivaldi. he is the perpetrator of the crimes yotf aHiide 

"Did you never hear that he had a wife— a to, whatever those may be ; and I will not he 
brother ? " made an instrument to semmon any man be- 

" Never 1 " fore a tribunal where innocence is no prolae- 

"Nor the means he used— no hint of— tection from ignominy, and where aoqiiMflB 
murder, of " alone may inflict death." 

The stranger paused, as if he wished Vi- "You doubt, then, the truth of what I 
valdi to fill up his meaning. Vivaldi was assert?" said the monk, in a haughty tooei. 
silent and aghast. *' Can I believe that of which I hare tt> 

"You know nothing, then, of Schedoni," proof?" replied Vivaldi, 
resumed the monk, after a deep pause--" no- " Yes, there are cases which do not admit 
thing of his past life? " of proctf ; under your peculiar cironmstancei» 

"Nothing, except what I have mentioned," this is one of them ; yon can act onlfi^wii 
replied Vivaldi. assertion. I attest," continued the moidE, 

" Then listen to what I shall unfold," con- raising his hollow voice to a tone of ^Aw^yXmw 
tinned the monk, with solemnity. "To- solemnity, ."I attest the powers which an 
morrow night you will be again carried to the beyond this earth to witness to the troth off 
place of torture ; you will be taken to a what 1 have dehvered I " 
chamber beyond that in which you were this As the stranger uttered this a42Qmtioi^ 
night. You will there winess many extra- Vivaldi observed, with emotion, the eAraor* 
ordinary things, of which you have not now dinary expression of his eyes. Vivaldi'a pre- 
any siispicion. Be not dibmayed ; I shall be sence of mind, however, did not forsake him ; 
there, though, perhaps, not visible." and. in the next moment, he said, " But who 

** Not visible ! " exclaimed Vivaldi. is he that thus attests? It is upon the aiMr- 

" Interrupt me not, but listen. When you tion of a stranger that I am to fdy, in drfett 
are asked ot father Schedoni, say that he has of proof ! It is a stranger who caUi npen ma 
lived for fifteen years in the disguise of a to bring solemn chanm against a man of 
mooK 4 member of the Dominicans of the w\vo» g^\i \Vx»re n^JbtetT 



THE ITALIAN. 



149^ 



'* Yott are not leqiiired to bring charges ; 
yoa are only lo mmmon him who will." 

" I sbotild !^ assist in brineing forward 
aecnsations ivMoh may be founded in error," 
replied Vivaldi. " If you are convinced of 
their truth, why do not you summon Ansaldo 
yourself 1 " 

" I shall do more," said the monk. 

"But why not summon also?" urged 
VhraldU 

" I shall mppeavt* said the stranger, with 
emphasis. 

Vivaldr, though somewhat awed by the 
manner which accompanied these words, still 
urged his inquiries : "Asa witness ? " said he. 

" Aye, as a dreadful witness 1 " replied the 
monk. 

" BW may not a witness summon persons 
before the tribunal of the Inquisition ? " con- 
tinued S^valdi, falteringly. 

" He may." 

••Why, then," observed Vivaldi, "am f, 
a stranger to you, called upon to do {hat 
wMdi YOU could perform yourself? " 

"Ask no further," rejoined the monk, 
"bnt answer whether you will deliver the 
summons?" 

"The charges which must follow," replied 
Vivaldi, " appear to be of a nature too solemn 
to jixtftify my promoting them. 1 resign the 
task to you." 

"When / summon," said the stranger, 
"jw» sbaU obey 1 " 

Vivaldi, again awed by his manner, again 
justice his refusal, and concluded with re- 
peating his surprise that he should be required 
to assbt in this mysterious affair ; " Since I 
neither know you, father," he added, "nor 
the P^itentiary Ansaldo, whom you bid me 
admonish to appear." 

'*You shall know me hereafter," said the 
stranger, frowningly; "and he drew from 
beneath his garment a dagger I 

'^^valdi remembered his dream. 

" Mark those spots," said the monk. 

Vivaldi looked, and beheld blood 1 

' ' This blood," added the stranger, pointing 
to the blade, " would have saved yours ! 
Here, at least, is seme print of truth ! To- 
morrow night you will meet me in the cham- 
ben of death I " 

As be spoke, he turned away ; and before 
Vivaldi had recovered from his consternation 
the light disappeared. Vivaldi knew that 
the stranger had quitted the prison only by 
the silence which prevailed there. 

He remained sunk in thought till, at the 
dawn of day, the man on watch unfastened 
the door of his cell, and brought, as uual, 
a jug of water, and some bread. Vivaldi 
inquired the name of the stranger who 
had visited him in the night. The sentinel 
looked surprised, and Vivaldi repeated the 
question bofore he could ohxtan in answer. 

•*J haf» been on guMrd since the first 



hour," Slid the man, "and 00 person in (hat 
time has passed through this door I " 

Vivaldi regarded the sentinel with atten- 
tion while he made this assertion, and did 
not perceive in his manner any conscir/nsncn 
of falsehood ; yrt he Icnew not how to Ixrliew 
what he had affirmed. "Did yiii he.ir no 
noise either ? " said Vivaldi. " Has all been 
silent during the nighi?" 

"I have heard only the bell of S^ii Do- 
minico strike upon the hour," replied tJK^ mati. 
*' and the watch word of the sentinels." 

" This is incomprehensible I " (.'xclainied 
Vivaldi. " Wh:it I no footsteps, no voice?." 

The man smiled contemptuously. ' ' None.- 
but of the seniiciels, " he ivplied. 

" How can you be ceruin you lie.trd only 
the sentinels, friend ? " added Vivaldi, 

"They speak only to pass the watcli word, 
and the clash of their arms is heard at iho 
same time." 

" But their footsteps ! — how are tl)oy dis- 
tinguished from those of other persons ! " 

" By the heaviness of their tread ; our 
sandals are braced with iron. But why these 
questions, signor ? " 

" You have kept guard at the door of this 
chamber ? " said Vivaldi. 

"Yes, signor." 

"And you have not once heard, during the 
whole night, a voice from within it ? " 

" None, signor." 

" Fear nothing from discovery, friend ; con- 
fess that you have slumbered." 

"I had a comrade," replied the sentinel, 
angrily, "has he too slumbered ! and if ho 
had, how could admittance be obtained with- 
out our keys?" 

"And those might easily have been pro- 
cured, friend, if you were overcome with 
sleep. You may rely upon my promise of 
secrecy." 

"Whatl" said the man; "have I kept 
guard for three years in the Inquisition, to be 
suspected by a heretic of neglecting my 
duty?" 

" If you were suspected by a heretic," 
replied Vivaldi, " you ought to console your- 
self by recollecting that his opinions are con- 
sidered to be erroneous." 

" We were watchful every minute of the 
night," added the sentinel, going. 

" This is incomprehensible ! " said Vivaldi. 
•* By what means could the stranger have 
entered my prison ? " 

"Signor, you still dream 1" replied the 
sentinel, pausing. "No person has been 
here." 

"67/7/ dream I" repeated Vivaldi, "how 
do you know that I have dreamed at all?" 
His mind deeply affected by the extraordinary 
circumstances of the dream, and the yet 
more extraordinary incident that had (ollwt^i^ 
Vivaldi gave a meanvQ^c Vo >3nft \no\^"& <A ^Q©* 
sentinel wbidb did n^ imVh^ \q VJ^rtcv. 






ijo THE iTAUAN. 

'*Wheii people deep, they are apt to ment whether thkiwi thefflght:li»li%rtpMMi1 

dream," replied the man, drily. " I suppose before. When he had xmanf^X^ hptlom, 

you had slept, signor." he inclined to bdieve dut \% WBf.M^wi; and 

'* A person, habited like a monk, came to the care which had beaq;Obwrfe(|!j^lviiM{^ 

me in the night," resumed Vivaldi ; and he him seemed to indicate that jbe'wavgipli|Ki4iP 

described the appearance of the stranger, some new place. - • • . -{••:>. 

llie sentinel, while he listened, became grave He passed through several avenne^fiidtfciiip 

and thoughtful. ascended ; soon after wMch heagain dcawf u d g d 

" Do you know any person resembling the a very long staircase, such as be Had. not any 

one I have mentioned, said Vivaldi. remembrance of^ and they passed ovQr 4.009^ 

" No 1 " replied the guard. siderable extent of level ground. ^ ^ 

" Though you have not seen him enter my hollow sound which his steps reC]miea, ht 

prison," continued Vivaldi, "you may per- judged that he was walking over. vanltib The 

haps recollect such a person, as an inhabitant footsteps of the sentinels who had iti^a^m^ 

•of the Inquisition." from the cell were no longer heard, andllii 

" San Dominico forbid ! " seemed to be left with his conductpn' oily. 

Vivaldi, surprised at this exclamation, in- A second flight appeared to lead hTniato 

quired the reason for it. subterraneous chambers, for he perc e i wd <he 

*'I know him not," replied the sentinel, air change^ and felt a damp irmpouv. wnp 

with emotion, and he abruptly left the prison, round him. The .menace of the VKXib tfai^ 

Whatever consideration might occasion this he should meet him in the chambenioCfMd^ 

sudden departure, his assertion that he had frequently occurred to ViviUi, . ,. , . 

been for three years a guard of the Inquisition His conductors stopped in. tUs • yda^ nH 

could scarcely be crecOted, since he had held seemed to hold a oonnutatioii. hot fbqr.W^ 

00 long a diak>gue with a prisoner, and was ap- in such low accents that their words irve ntt 

parently insensible of the danger he incurred distinguishable, except a .fiew. nnnn i pnwI iBd 

by so doing. ones that hintcxl of more than ^^yaldlooilUi 

. comprehend. He was at length agpin led 

r-trAivT'irD wtttt forward, and soon after he heard tlw h«^ 

CHAPTER XXVII. grating of hinges, and perceived that.Ua WM 

AT about the same hour as on tlie pre- passing through several doors,' bj Jtbo sitefr 

ceding night Vivaldi heard persons tion of which, judging tbey wer^ tlM^sme he 

approaching his prison, and the door un- had entered the night before^ he. ooodndad 

folding, his former conductors appeared, that he was going to the hlUl of th^ tribnuL 

They threw over him the same mantle as His conductors stopped again, and VMIdB 

before, and in addition, a black veil, that heard the iron rod strike three tines tvoA A 

completely muffled bis eyes ; after which they door ; immediately a strange voice ipoke 

led him from the chamber. Vivaldi heard from within, and the door was unctoed.! He 

the door shut on his departure, and the sen- passed on, and imagined that he WM ed^ 

tinels followed his steps, as if their duty was raitted into a spacious vault ; far the .dbr «M 

finished, and he was to return thither no more, freer, and his steps sounded to a dlstanoB;- 
At this moment he remembered the words of Presently a voice, as on fhn pmofullnr 
the stranger when he had displayed the poni- night, summoned him to come fonvwd. ana 

ard, and Vivaldi apprehended the worst from Vivaldi understood that liti.Mii agnJn bcfctu 

having thwarted the designs of a person ap- the tribonaL It was the. voice of jUie iatnW- 

parently so malignant : but he exulted in the tor who had been his chief examiner^ 

rectitude which had preserved him from " You, Vincentio di Vivgldi," . U * 

debasement ; and, with the magnanimous en- *' answer to your name, and to the 

thusiasm of virtue, he almost welcomed tions which shall be put to yoii«;.i 

suflFerings which would prove the firmness of equivocation, on pain of the tortme.'* ■ 

his justice towards an enemy ; for he deter- As the monk had predicted^ Vivaldi 

mined to brave everything rather than impute asked what he knew of &ther s^^h^*^, and* 

to Schedoni circumstances the truth of which when he replied, as he had formeriy dioiM to 

he possessed no means of ascertaining. his mysterious visitor, he waa told that be 

While Vivaldi was conducted, as on the knew more than he aclokowledgedL 

preceding night, through many passages, he « I know no more," replied VhmldL ". •:? 

endeavoured to discover by their length, and "You equivocate," said the inquidtor. 

the abruptness of their turnings, whether they *< Declare what you have heard, and .re* 

were the same he bad traversed before. Sud- member that you formerly took an: oath' td 

denlyone of his conductors cried "Steps!" that purpose." . « j 

It was the first word Vivaldi had ever heard Vivaldi was silent, till a tiemendons 'vpicd 

him utter. He immediately perceived that from the tribunal commanded him to iCipBOf 

u*'2^ u^^V*^^ ^® ^^fi*** 'o descend ; his oath. • v^ 

J?5t . ^ u ' ¥ ^"^ *° *^^^ ^e number •• I do respect it,", said S^anSOix -««aad I 
Of UM stops^thAi htmigU form some judg- ooniia^ 'ycwc xo V»iw^ ^^9i.\^te 



THR ITALIAN, 



«5i 



tnifh wben I declare that what I am going to 
rdate is a report to which I give no confi- 
dence, and eoncernhig even the probability 
of whieh I cannot produce the smallest 
proof." 

" Respect tmth 1 " said another rolce from 
the tribanal, and Vivaldi fancied he distin- 
gidsbed the tones of the monk. He paused 
a moment, and the exhortation was repeated. 
Vivaldi then related what the stranger had 
aaid concerning the familv of Schedoni, and 
the disguise which the father had assumed in 
the oonrent of the Spirito Santo ; but forbore 
even to name the penitentiary Ansaldo, and 
any circumstances connected with the extra- 
ordinary confession. Vivaldi concluded with 
again declaring that he had not sufficient au- 
fbority to justify a belief in those reports. 

*■ On what authority do you repeat them ? *' 
iaid the vicar-generaL 

Vivaldi was silent. 

"On what authority?" inquired the in- 
<}uisitor. 

Vivaldi, after a momentary hesitation, re- 
plied, "What I am about to declare, holy 
nthers, is so extraordinary " 

"Tremble," said a voice close to his ear, 
which he instantly knew to be the monk's, 
and the suddenness of which electrified him. 
He was unable to conclude the sentence. 

" What is your authority for the reports ? " 
demanded the inquisitor. 

" It is unknown, even to myself," answered 
Vivaldi. 

"Do not equivocate," said the vicar- 



'•I solemnly protest," r^oined Vivaldi, 
"that I know not either the name or the 
condition of my informer, and that I never 
even beheld his face till the period when he 
ip^ce of fether Schedoni." 

" Tremble t " reputed the same low but 
emphatic voice in his ear. Vivaldi started, 
and- turned involuntarily towards the sound, 
though his ejres could not assist his curiosity. 

*' YOU did well to say that you had some- 
thing extraordinary to add," observed the 
inqmsitor. "Tis evident, also, that you 
expected something extraordinary from your 
judges, since you supposed they would credit 
these assertions." 

Vivaldi was too proud to attempt the justi- 
fying himself against so gross an accusation, 
or to make any reply. 

*'Why do you not summon fJEither An- 
saldo?*' said the voice. "Remember my 
words 1" 

VIvatdr, again awed by the voice, hesitated 
for an instant how to act, and in that instant 
his courage returned. 

'* My informer stands beside me f " said 
VivaldS, boldly. " I know his voice 1 Detain 
him ; it is of consequence." 

" Whoae voice ? "^demanded ffae inqtilsftor. 
,^ "So pa^on ipoke but mysdf,^ 



" Whose voice? " said the vicar-gcnoral. 

" The voice was close beside mo," replifil 
Vivaldi. *' It spoke low, hut I knew it well." 

"This is cither the cunning or the frenzy 
of despair ! " observed the vicar-gencr.il. 

" Not any person is now lx;side you, except 
the familiars, ' said the inquisitor. " and they 
wait to do their office, if you shall refuse to 
answer the questions put to you." 

" I persist in my assertion." rcpli>Kl Vi- 
valdi ; " and I supplicate that my eyes may 
be unbound, that I may know my enemy." 

The tribunal, after a long private consulta- 
tion, granted the request ; the veil was with- 
drawn, and Vivaldi perceived beside him^ 
only the familiars. Their faces, as is usual, 
were concealed. It appeared that one of 
these torturers must be the mysterious enemy 
who pursued him, if, indeed, that enemy was 
an inhabitant of the eartli I and Vivaldi re- 
quested that they might be ordered to un- 
cover their features. He was sternly rebuked 
for so presumptuous a requisition, and re- 
minded of the inviolable law and faith which 
the tribunal had pledged, that persons a|>- 
pointed to their awful office should never be 
exposed to the revenge of the criminal whom 
it might be their duty to punish. 

•* Their dutv I " excL-ilmed Vivaldi, thrown 
from his guard by strong indignation. " And 
is faith held sacred with demons ? " 

Without awaiting the order of the tribunal, 
the familiars immediately covered Vivaldi's 
face with the veil, and he felt himself again 
in their grasp. He endeavoured, however, 
to disentangle his hands, and. at length, 
shook these men from their hold, and again 
unveiled his eyes ; but the familiars were in- 
stantly ordered to replace the veil. 

The inquisitor bade Vivaldi to recollect in 
whose presence he then was, and to dreid 
the punishment which his resistance had in- 
curred, and which would be inflicted without 
delay unless he could give some instance 
that might tend to prove the truth of his late 
assertions. 

"If you expect that I should say more," 
replied Vivaldi, •*! claim, at least, protec- 
tion from the unbidden violence of the men 
who guard me. If they are suffered, at their 
pleasure, to sport with the misery of their 

Prisoner, I will be inflexibly silent ; and, since 
must suffer, it shall be according to the 
law^s of the tribunal." 

The vicar-general, or, as he is called, the 
grand inquisitor, promised Vivaldi the degree 
of protection he claimed ; and demanded, at 
the same time, what were the words he had 
just heard. 

Vivaldi considered that, though justice 
bade him avoid accusing an enemy of sus- 
picious circumstances concerning which h^ 
had no proof, yet, l\iQX Ti!et\i!b,et Ya&>CvcA. x«a 
common sense Teq>uxc4 Yv^ ^cra2A Toakft ^ 
sacrifice of h\mst\[ to \\« ^draw3.\xi"«^^ 



xsa 



THE ITALIAN, 



he was placed ; he therefore, without further 
scruple, acknowledged that the voice had 
bidden him require qf the tribunal to sum- 
mon one father Ansaldo, the grand peniien- 
tiary of the Santa del Pianto. near Naples, 
and also father Schedoni, who was to answer 
to extraordinary charges which would be 
brought against him by Ansaldo. Vivaldi 
anxiously and repeatedly declared that he 
knew not the nature of the charges, nor that 
any just grounds for them existed. 

These asserdons seemed to throw the tri- 
bunal into new perplexity. Vivaldi heard 
their bu«>y voices in low debate, which con- 
tinued for a considerable time. In this 
inter\'al he had leisure to perceive the many 
improbabilities that either of the familiars 
should be the stranger who so mysteriously 
haunted him ; and among these was the cir- 
cumstance of his having resided so long at 
Naples. 

Tlic tribunal, after some time had elapsed 
in consul tn lion, proceeded on the examina- 
tion, and Vivaldi was asked what he knew of 
father Ansaldo. He immediately replied that 
Ansaldo was an utter stranger to him, and 
that he was not even acquainted with a single 
person residing in the Santa del Pianto or 
who had any knowledge of the peniten- 
tiary. 

•• How ! " said the grand inquisitor, " You 
forget that the person who bade you require 
of this tribimal to summon Ansaldo has 
knowledr.e of him." 

•' Pardon me, I do not forget," replied Vi- 
\-aldi ; and I request it may be remembered 
that I am not acquainted with that person. 
If, therefore, he had given me any account of 
Ansalda, I could not have relied upon its 
authenticity." Vivaldi again required of 
the tribunal to understand that he did not 
summon Ansaldo. or any other person, 
before them, but had merely obeyed their 
command to repeat what the stranger had 
said. 

The tribunal acknowledged the justness of 
this injunction, and exculpated him from any 
harm that should be the consequence of the 
summons. But this assurance of safety for 
himself was not sufficient to appease Vivaldi, 
who was alarmed lest he should be the means 
of brinfring an innocent person under sus- 
picion. The grand inquisitor again addressed 
him, aficr a general silence had been com- 
manded in the court. 

*' The account you have given of your in- 
former," said he, "is so extraordinary that 
it would not destrve credit, but that you have 
discovered the utmost reluctance to reveal the 
charge he gave you ; from which it appears, 
that on your part, at least, the summons is 
not malicious. But are you certain that you 
have not deluded yourself, and that the voice 
beside fou was not an imaginary onCi coDjured 
tip by your agitated spirits ? " 



"lam certain," replied Vivaldi, with fixm- 
ness. 

" It is tme," resumed the gmnd inquisitor, 
" that several persons were near you when 
you exclaimed that you heard the virioe of 
your informer ; yet no person beard it besides 
yourself? " 

' ' Where are thosepeisons now? " demandod 
Vivaldi. 

" They are dispersed ; alarmed at yaar 
accusation. 

" If you will summon them," said VtinUif 
" and order that my eyes may be uncGwered, 
I will point out to you without besitatioa the 
person of my informer, should he lemaln 
among them. 

The tribunal commanded that they shoald 
appear, but new difficulties arose. It was not 
remembered of whom the crowd condsted ; 
a few individuals only were recollected, and 
these were smnmoned. 

Vivaldi, in solemn expectation, heard steps 
and the hum of voices gathering round him« 
and impatiently awaited for the words that 
would restore him to sight, and perhaps re- 
lease him from uncertainty. In a few mo- 
ments he heard the command given ; the ^^ 
was once more removed from his eyes, and 
he was ordered to point out the accuser, Vi- 
valdi threw a hasiy glance upon the sur- 
rounding; strangers. 

" The lights bum dimly," said he, " I cMft- 
not distinguish these faces. 

It was ordered that a lamp should 'be 
lowered from the roof, and that the strangen 
should arrange themselves on either side of 
Vivaldi. When this was done, and he glanced 
his eyes again upon the crowd, " He is not 
here 1 " said Vivaldi ; not one of these coun- 
tenances resembles the monk <^ PalussL 
Yet, stay ; who is he that stands in the shade 
behind those persons on the left ? Bid him 
lift his cowl ! 

The crowd fell back, and the person to 
whom Vivaldi had pointed was left alone 
within the circle. 

" He is an officer of the Inquisition,'* said 
a man near Vivaldi, "and he may not be 
compelled to discover his face, unless by an 
express command from the tribunaL" 

* ' I call upon the tribunal to command it I " 
said Vivaldi. 

*'Who calls!" exclaimed a voice, and 
Vivaldi recognised the tones of the monk. 
but he knew not exactly whence they came. 

"I. Vincentio di Vivaldi," replied the 
prisoner, " I claim the privilege that has 
been awarded me^ and \ud you unveil yonr 
countenance." 

There was a pause of silence in the courts 
except that a dull murmin: ran through the 
tribunal. Meanwhile, the figure witmn the 
drde stood motionless, and remained veiled. 

" Spare him. " said the man who had befue 
addi^sed Vws^ \ «' ^ythaa vestons for wish- 



THB ITALIAN. 



>5i 



ing to Rmain unloiown, which you cannot 
coojecfiira. He is an officer of the Inquisi- 
tion, and not the person you apprehend. ' 

"Perhaps I eon ooojecture his reasons," 
replied ViviUdi, who. m&ng his voice, added, 
** I appeal to this triboiuu, and command 
yoa who stand alone within the cirde, you in 
Uack garments, to unveil j^onr features 1 " 

Immediatdy a loud roioe issued from the 
tribonal, and said, 

" We command you, in the name of the 
most holy Inquisition, to reveal yourself? " 

The stranger trembled, but, without pre- 
sumfag to hesitate^ uplifted his cowL Vi- 
valdi's eyes were eagerly fixed upon him ; but 
the action disclosed, not the countenance of 
the mook, but of an official whom he recol- 
lected to have seen once before, though 
exactly on what occasion he did not now 
remember* 

*'Thi8 is not my informer 1 '* said Vivaldi, 
tmning from him with deep disappointment. 
while ue stranger dropped his cowl, and the 
crowd closed upon him. At the assertion of 
Vivaldi, the members of the tribunal looked 

XB-eacfa other doubtingly, and were silent, 
die grand inquisitor, waving his hand, 
as if to command attention, addressed Vi- 
valdi. 

" It appears, then, that you havt formerly 
seen the »oe of your informer ! " 

"I hove already declared so," replied 
^vakll. 

The grand inquisitor demanded when and 
where be bad seen it. 

" Last night, and in my prison," answered 
VivaUU. 

"In 'your prison 1" said the ordinary in- 
quisitor, contemptuously, who had before 
examined him, "and in your dreams, too, 
no donbt ! " 

" In your prison ! " exclaimed several 
members of the lower tribunal. 

" He dreamsstill 1 " observed an inquisitor. 
"Holy fathers! he abuses your patience, 
and the firensy of terror has deluded his 
credulity. We neglect the moments. 

"We must inquire further into this," said 
another inquisitor. " Here is some deception. 
If yon, Vinoentio di Vivaldi have asserted a 
falsehood— tremble 1 " 

Whether Vivaldi's memory still vibrated 
with the voice of the monk, or that the tone 
in which t^ same word was now pronounced 
did resemble it, he almost started when the 
inqui^tor bad said irtmhltf and he de- 
immded who spoke then. 

'' It to •midf," answarad the inquisitor. 

After a thoort convarsatioc among the mem- 
bm of Ae tribtmal, the grand inquisiter 
gave orders that the sentinels who had 
watched oo the preceding night at the prison 
door of Vivaldi should be brought into the 
baU of jnslioe. The persons who had been 
lat^ jrtiitimoirfirf iata tb0 duunbet wive itow 



bidden to withdraw, and all further examina- 
tion was supended till the arrival of the 
sentinels. Vivaldi heard only the low voices 
of the inquisitors, as they conversed privately 
together, and he remained silent, thoughtful, 
arid amazed. 

When the sentinels appeared, and were 
asked who had entered the prison of Viva'di 
during the last night, they declared, without 
hesitation or confusion, that not any person 
had passed through the door after the hour 
when the prisoner had returned from exami- 
nation till the following morning, when the 
guard had carried in the usual allowance of 
bread and water. In this assertion they per- 
sisted, without tlie least equivocation, noiwii!^ 
standing which they were ordertd into con- 
finement till the afiair should be cleared up. 

The doubts, however, which %«eru admitted 
as to the integrity of these men. did not con- 
tribute to dissipate those which had prevailed 
over the opposite side of the question. On 
the contrary, the suspicions of the tribunal, 
augmenting with their perplexity, sremed to 
fluctuate equally over every point of the sub- 
ject before them, t II, instead of throwing any 
light upon the truth they only served to in- 
volve the whole in deeper obscurity. More 
doubtful than before of the honesty of Vi- 
valdi's extraordinary assertions, the grand 
inquisitor informed him that if, after further 
inquiry into this affair, it should appear he 
had t>een trifling with the credulity of his 
judges, he would be severely puni&hed for his 
audacity ; but that, on the other hand, should 
there be reason to believe that the sentinels 
had failed in their duty, and that some per- 
son had entered his prison during the night, 
the tribunal would proceed in a diiferent 
manner. 

Vivaldi, perceiving that, to be believed, it 
was necessary be should be more circumstan- 
tial, described with exactness the person and 
appearance of the monk, without, however, 
mentioning the poniard which bad been 
exhibited. A profound silence reigned in the 
chamber while he spoke ; it .seemed a silence 
not merely of attention, but of astonishment. 
Vivaldi himself was awed, and. when he had 
concluded, almost expected to hear the voice 
of the monk uttering defiance or threatening 
vengeance ; but all remained hushed, till the 
inquisitor who had first examined him said 
in a solemn tone, 

" We have listened with attention to what 
you have delivered, and will give the case a 
full inquiry. Some points on which you have 
touched ezdte our amazement, and call for 
particular regard. Retire v^ence y6tt came, 
and sleep tms nig^t vrithout fear ; you will 
soon kn&w mor§," 

Vivaldi was immediately led from the cham- 
ber, and, still blindfolded, re-coQducie.d\.c»>!u^ 
prison to which bie bid .suiy^vt^ V\.N<%b ^a- 
0igttcdhftiBih6uldx^ttxBLiQ!OTQ«ni. >^>MGk.^te^ 



xS4 



THE ITAUAN. 



vieil was withdrawn, he perceiTed that his 
guard was changed. 

Again left to the silence of his cell, he re- 
viewed all that had passed in the chamber of 
iustioe : the questions which had been put to 
him ; the dififerent manners of the inquisitors ; 
the occurrence of the monk's voice ; and the 
similarity which he had fancied he perceived 
between it and that of an inquisitor, when 
the latter pronounced the word tremble ; but 
the consideration of all these circumstances 
did not in any d^free relieve him from his 
perplexity. Sometimes he was inclined to 
think that the monk was an inquisitor, and 
the voice had more than once appeared to 
proceed from the tribunal ; but he remembered 
«lso that, more than once, it had spoken close 
to his ear, and he knew that a member of this 
tribunal might not leave his station during the 
examination of a prisoner ; and that, even if 
he had dared to do so. his singular dress would 
have pointed him out to notice, and con- 
sequently to suspicion, at the moment when 
Vivaldi had exclaimed that he heard the voice 
of his informer. 

Vivaldi, however, could not avoid me- 
ditating, with surprise, on the last words 
which the inquisitor who had been his chief 
examiner had addressed to him, when he 
was dismissed from before the tribunsd . These 
were the more surprising, because they were 
the first from him that had in any degree 
indicated a wish to console or quiet the alarm of 
the prisoner ; and Vivaldi even fancied that they 
betrayed some foreknowledge that he would 
not hie disturbed this night by the presence of 
his awful visitor. He would entirely have 
ceased to apprehend, though not to expect, 
had he been allowed a light and any weapon 
of defence ; if, in truth, the stranger was of a 
nature to fear a weapon ; but to be thus ex- 
posed to the designs of a mysterious and 
powerful being, whom he was conscious of 
having offended, to sustain such a situation 
without suffering anxiety required somewhat 
more than courage or less than reason. 



CHAPTER XXVHI. 

IN consequence of what bad transpired at 
the last examination of Vivaldi, tl^ grand 
penitentiary Ansaldo, together with the father 
Schedoni, were cited to appear before the 
table of the holy office. 

Schedoni was arrested on his way to Rome, 
whither he was going privatdv to make funher 
efforts for the liberation, of .Vivaldi, whose 
retease he had found it mere difficult to effect 
than his imprisonment : the person upon 
whose assistance the confessor relied in the 
first instance having boasted of more in- 
fluence than he possosed, or perhaps thought 
H prudent to ecstrL Schedoni had been the 
' «u/c»i5 to procnre aa immediate retem 



for Vivaldi, lest a report of \iSa titaatloB 
should reach his fiuni^ notwiihstaiidiiig tha 
precautions which are iisiuily employed to 
throw an impenetrable shroud oter the 
prisoners of this dreadful tribunal, and bonr 
them for ever from the knowledge of thefr 
friends. Such premature discovery of mvaldi^ 
circumstances Schedoni apprdiended migtit 
include also a discovery of the penecutar» and 
draw down upon himself the SLahorrenee and 
the vengeance of a family whom it was now 
more than ever his wish and his intcrstt to 
conciliate. It was still his intention that the 
nuptials of Vivaldi and Ellena should be 
lu-ivately solemnised immediatdy on the xe- 
lease of the prisoner, who, even if he had 
reason to suspect Schedoni for his late' pdN 
secutor, would then be interested in oonoea&ag 
his suspicions for ever, and finomwhom,' thes^ 
fore, no evil was to be apprehended. 

How little did Vivaldi foresee that, fai -re- 
peating to the tribunal the Stranger^a snnH 
mons of father Schedoni, he was defetrh^ 
or, perhaps, wholly preventing hs own mar- 
riage with EUena di Rosalba. How UttM, 
also, did he apprehend what wodkl be ti» 
further consequences of a disdcaure, Wfaidk 
the peculiar circumstances of his aituatioB 
had hardly permitted him to withhdkl; 
though, could he have understood the pn^ 
bable event of it, he woukl have bravea wSl 
the terrors of the tribunal, and deafh itsdl^ 
rather than incur the remorse of havh^ pro- 
moted it. 

The motive for his anrestation wasoQ» 
cealed from Schedoni, who had not die re- 
motest suspicion of its nature but attribntad 
the arreat to a discovery whidi the txibunal 
had made of his being the accuser of ^nwaUi. 
This disclosure he judged to be the romjn 
quence of his own imjundaioe in having 
stated, as an instance of -Vivaldi's con te mpt 
for the Catholic faith, that he had insulted a 
priest while doing penance in the church of 
the Spirito Santa But by what art the tri- 
bunal had discovered that he was the priest 
alluded to, and the author of the aocusation, 
Schedoni could by no means conjecture. He 
was willing to believe that this arrest was 
only for the purpose di obtaining ' proof of 
Vivaldi's guilt ; and the oonfessor knew that 
he could so conduct himself in.evidence-as in 
all probability to exculpatSs tbe'prisoner, from 
whom, when he should explaki himself, no 
resentment on account of his former conduit 
was to be apprehended. Yet Schedoni was 
not perfectly at ease ; for it was possible that 
a knowledge of .Vivaldi's situation;: and of 
the author of it, had nached his iuntty; and 
had produced faisrdwn arrest On this head, 
however, his fears were not powcsful ; since^ 
the longer he dwelt upon the subject, the 
more improbable it appealed that Such a dis- 
dosure, at least so far a» it lelaied (9 hjm- 
uif, cae\AYMLYe\NmtsawfaidL . • 



THE iTAUAN. 



>5S 



Vivaldi, {rom the night of his late examina- 
tion, was not called upon till Schedoni and 
father Ansaldo appeared together in the hall 
of the tribunal. The two latter had already 
been seporatsly eaamtoed. and Ansaldo had 
privately stated, the pardculars of the con- 
fession, he had received on the vigil of San 
Marco, in the year 1753, for which disclosure 
he had received fiormal absolution. What 
had passed at that examination does not 
appear ; but on this, his second interrogation, 
he waa requiied to repeat the subject and 
the drcumstanoes of the confession. This 
was ixv>bably with a view of observing its 
effect on Sdiedoni and on Vivaldi, vrhich 
would direct the opinion of the tribunal as to 
the guilt of the confessor and the veracity of 
the youn^ prisoner. 

.On .this ni^ht a very exact inquiry was 
made concemmg every person who had ob- 
tained admission into the hall of justice ; 
such oflfidals as were not immediately neces- 
sary, to asii^ in the ceremonies of the tribunal 
wen cnihided, together with every other 
persoii belonging to the Inquisition not 
material to the evidence, or to the judges. 
When this scrutiny was over, the prisoners 
■were.broaght in, and their conductors ordered 
to wittadmv. A silence of some moments 
prevailed in the hall ; and, however different 
miigfat he the reflections of the several pri- 
aoBarib the degree of anxious expectation 
wm in each, probably, nearly the same. 

The graiiid-vicar having spoken a few 
wofda in private to a person on his left 
hand,- an inquisitor rose. 

.'* If any person in this court," said he, " is 
known by the name of father Schedoni, be- 
longing to the Dominican society of the 
Sj^to Santo at Naples, let him appear." 

Schedoni answered to the summons. He 
came forward with a firm step, and, having 
cfoased himself and bowed to the tribunal, 
awaited in silence its commands. 

The penitentiary Ansaldo was next called 
upon. Vivaldi observed that be faltered as 
he advanced, and that his obedience to the 
tribunal was more profound than Schedoni's 
had been. Vivaldi himself was then sum- 
moned ; his air was calm and dignified, and 
his countenance expressed the solemn energy 
of his feelings, but nothing of dejection. 

Schedoni and Ansaldo were now, for the 
first time^ confronted* Whatever might be 
Uie fedings of Schedoni on beholding the 
penitentiary of the Santa del Pianto, he 
eSbctoally concealed them. 

The grand-vicar himself opened the exa- 
mination: "You, father Schedoni, of the 
Spirito Santo," he said, "answer and say 
whether the person who. now stands before 
you. bearing the title of grand penitentiary 
of the order of the Black Penitents, and pre- 
judin? over the convent of the Santa Maria 
del Pianto at N^des^ i§ known to you* " 



To this requisition Schedoni replied with 
firmness in the negative. 

"You have never, to your knowledge, seen 
him before this hour?" 
'* Never I " said Schedoni. 
"Let the oath be administered," added the 
grand-vicar. Schedoni having accepted it, 
the same questions were put to Ansaldo con- 
cerning the confessor, when, to the astonish- 
ment of Vivaldi and of the greater part of 
the court, the penitentiary denied all know- 
ledge of Schedoni. His negative was given, 
however, in a less decisive manner than that 
of the confessor, and when the usual oath 
was offered, Ansaldo declined to accept it. 

Vivaldi was next called upon to identify 
Schedoni : he declared that the person who 
was then pointed out to him he had never 
known by any other denomination than that 
of fiither Schedoni, and that he had always 
understood him to be a monk of the Spirito 
Santo ; but Vivaldi was at the same time 
careful to repeat that he knew nothing further 
relative to his life. 

Schedoni was somewhat surprised at this 
apparent candour of Vivaldi towards himself ; 
but accustomed to impute an evil motive to 
all conduct which he could not clearly com- 
prehend, he did not scruple to believe that 
some latent mischief was directed against 
him in this seemingly honest declaration. 

After some further preliminary forms had 
passed, Ansaldo was ordered to relate the 
particulars of the confession which had been 
made to him on the eve of San Marco. It 
must be remembered that this was still what 
is called in the Inquisition a private exami- 
nation. 

After he had taken the customary oath to 
relate neither more nor less than the truth ol 
what had passed before him, Ansaldo's depo- 
sitions were written down nearly in Uie u>l- 
lowing. words, to which Vivaldi listened with 
almost trembling attention, for, besides tiie 
curiosity which some previous circumstances 
had excited respecting them, he believed that 
his own fate in a great measure depended 
upon a discovery of the fact to which they led. 
What, if be had surmised how much I and 
that the person whom he had been in some 
degree instrumental in citing before this tre- 
mendous tribunal was the father of his EUena 
di Rosalba ! 

Ansaldo, having again answered to his name 
and titles, gave his deposition as follows : — 

" It was on the eve of the twenty -fifth of 
April, in the year 1752, that as I sat, accord- 
ing to my custom, in the confessional of San 
Marco, I was alarmed by deep groans, which 
came from the box on my left hand." 

Vivaldi observed that the date now men- 
tioned agreed with that recorded by the 
stranger, and he was thus prepared to believe 
what might foUovf , axi^Xo ^vn^Y^ ^^xv^^q&sm 
to this extiaoi^^naxy «iXL<i^x^:^Q$s^^^^'CAJ|2u 



— A 



. .. t* . 






156 



TtiE ITALIAN. 



An&iVlo oontinned, ** 1 was the more ought not to be passed ovef As irrelevAnti 
alarmed by these sounds because I had not The inquisitor ndnnittfld to this ofiJi^on, but 
been prepared for them ; I knew not that any objected that they were not pertineiit to tM 



person was in the confessional, nor had even 
observed anyone pass along the usle — but 
the duskiness of the hour may account for my 
having failed to do so ; it was after sunser, 
and the t»pers at the shrine of Shu Antonio 
as yet buni-d feebly in the twilight. 



moment : and AnsaMowas again bMdea to 
repeat what he had heard at confessioii. 

*' When the stranger tvtumed to the sfepi 
of the confessional, he liad acquired mrfBcieiit 
resolution to go through with the task he had 
imposed upon himself, and a thriUing voice 



'^ Be brief, holv nther," said the inquisitor spoke through the grate the facts I am abont 

who had formerly been most active in examin- to relate." 
ing Vivaldi ; " speak closely to the point." Father Ansaldo paused, and was somewhat 

" The groans would sometimes cease," re- agitated; he seemed endeavouring to'm- 

sumed Ansaldo, " and long pauses of silence collect courage to go through with what he 

follow ; they were those of a soul in agony, had begun. During this pause the dleooe of 

struggi ing with the consciousness of guilt, yet expectation wrapt th6 court, and the eyes of the 

wanting resolution to confess it. I tried to tribunal were directed altematdy to AiuahM 

encourage the penitent, and held forth every and Schedoni, who certainly required Bomtf- 

hope of mercy and forgiveness which my duty thing more than human firmness to support 

would allow, but for a considerable time with- unmoved the severe scrutiny, and the yet 

out effect — the enormity of the sin seemed severer suspicions, to which he stood r«rpqewf. 

too big for utterance, yet the penitent appeared Whether, however, it was the foititiide of 

equally unable to endure the concealment of conscious innocence or the hardihood of tttto- 

it. His heart was bursting with the secret, cious vice that protected the conressor. he IbciL 

and required the comfort of absolution, even tainly did not betray any emotion. ' ViVMldii 

at the price of the severest penance." who had unceasingly observed him froHki'tiie 

" Fdcts ! " said the inquisitor, "these are commencement of the depoaitiona, felt lA- 

only surmises." dined to beUeve that he was not the penitent 

'* Facts will come full soon ! " replied An- described. Ansaldo, having at lengtn veoo^ 



saldo, and bowed his head ; " the mention of 
them will petrify you, holy fathers I as they 
did me, though not for the same reasons. 
While I endeavoured to encourage the peni- 
tent, and assured him that absolution should 
follow the acknowledgment of his crimes, 
however heinous those crimes might be, if 



lected himself, proceeded as foHows : 

"'I have been through life,' said the' 
tent, 'the slave of m^ passions, and ^*dMy 
have led me into homUe excesses: I haA 
once a brother ' He stopped, and 'deep 



groans again told the agony of his sool ; 

length he added, ' That brother had a wifei 
accompanied by sincere repentance, he more Now listen, father, and say wliether guilt like 
than once began his confession, and abruptly mine may hope for absolution I She was 
dropped it. Once, indeed, he quitted the con- beautiful— I loved her ; she was virtuous, mad 
fessional ; his agitated spirit required liberty ; I despaired. You, father,' he continobd, in 
and it was then, as he walked with perturbed a frightful tone, ' never knew the fiiry of de- 
steps along the aisle, that I first observed his spair ! It overcame or communicated its own 
figure. He was in the habit of a white friar, force to every other passion of my sonl,'and I 
and, as nearly as I can recollect, was about sought to release myself from its tortures by 

the stature of him, the father Schedoni, who *'" ' ' — -»=-■" '*^ ' 

now stands before me." 

As Ansaldo delivered these words, the 
attention of the whole tribunal was turned 

-upon Schedoni, who stood unmoved, and with he spoke as foUow-s : * My brotlier died at a 



any means. My brother died 1 ' The peni- 
tent paused again," continued Ansaldo. "I 
trembled while I listened ; my lips were 
sealed. At length, I bade him proceed, and 



his eyes bent towards the ground. 

*' His face," continued the penitentiary, *' I 
<3id not see ; he was, with good reason, care- 
ful to conceal it ; other resemblance, there- 
fore, than the stature. I cannot point out 
i>etween them. The voice indeed, the voice 
of the penitent, I think I shall never forget ; 
1 should know it again at any distance of 
time." 



distance from home.' Again the penitent 
paused, and the silence continued so long 
that I thought it proper to inquire of what 
disorder the brother had expired. ' Father, 
I was his mm-derer! ' said the penitent, in a 
voice which I never can forget ; it sank into 
my heart." 

Ansaldo appeared affected by the remem- 
brance, and was for a moment silent. At the 



" Has it not struck your ear since you came last words Vivaldi had particularly noticed 
within these walls ? " said a member of the Schedoni, that he might judge by thdr effiect 



tribunal. 

"Of that hereafter, "observed the inquisitor, 
"you wander from the point, father." 

The vJcar-geDeral remarked that the cir- 



upon him whether he was guilty ; but he rew 
mained in his former attitude, and his eyes 
were still fixed upon the ground. 

Proceed, father," said the inquisitor. 



cumstODccM Just iielated were important, and * ' "Wbal viqa vo\» wgdj to this confesuon ? " 



The itauax. 



'.-•/ 



''I WAS iikDU" nid Ansiildo; "but at 
lengtb I bflde the penitent go on. * I con- 
trived,' aaU he, ' that my brother should die 
at a distance from home ; and I so conducted 
the affiur that his vidow never suspected the 
cause of his death . It was not till long after 
the usual time of mourning hiid expired tlut 
I ventured to sulidt her hand. But s>hc had 
not yet orgottm my brother, and she rejected 
me. My passion would no longer be trifled 
idth. I caused her to lie carrit-d from her 
hoose^ and she was afterwards willing to re- 
ttieve her honour by the marriage vow. I 
had ncrifioed my conscience without having 
found happiness; she did not even conde- 
scend to roncflf^ her disdain. Mortified, ex- 
aspenited by her conduct, I began to suspect 
that some other emotion than resentment 
occasioned this disdain; and, last of all, 
jealouqr— jea^^ousy came to crown my misery— 
to light up all my passions into madness 1 

**The penitent," added Ansaldo, "ap- 
peared fay the manner in which he uttered 
this to he nearly frantic at the moment, and 
cooTuIsive sobs soon stifled his words. When 
he resumed his confession, he said : * I soon 
ioond an object for my jealousy. Among the 
few p*nifi»* who visited us in the retirement 
of our country residence was a gentleman 
who, I landed, loved my wife. I fancied, too, 
that vhenewer he appeared an air of particu- 
lar Hiriiifartift" was visible on her countenance. 
She seemed to have pleasure in conversing 
wbh and showing him distinction. I even 
sometimes thought she had pride in display- 
ing to me the i»eference she entertained for 
him, and that an air of triumph, and even of 
scorn, was addressed to me, whenever she 
mentioned his name. Perhaps I mistook 
resentment for love, and she only wished to 
punish me by exciting my jealousy. Fatal 
cnor I she punished herself adso 1 ' 

" Be less circumstantial, father," said the 
inqusitor. 

Ansaldo bowed his head, and proceeded. 

"'One evening.' continued the penitent, 
'that I returned home unexpectedly, I was 
told that a visitor was with my wife 1 As I 
aiqfuroached the apartment where they sat I 
heard the voice of Sacchi ; it seemed mourn- 
ful and supplicating. I stopped to listen, 
and distinguished enough to fire me with ven- 
geance. I restrained myself, however, so far 
as to step softly to a lattice that opened from 
the passage, and overlooked the apartment. 
The traitor was on his knee before her. 
Whether sh« had heard my step, or observed 
my face through the hiijh ia'tice, or that she 
resented his conduct, I know not. but she 
rose immediately from her chair. I did not 
pause to question her motive ; but. seizing my 
stiletto, I rushed into the room with an intent 
to strike it to the villain's heart. The sup- 
posed assassin of my honour escaped into the 
garden^ and was bejurd of no more, ' ' But 



your wife?' said I. ' Her boaoni received the 
poniard 1 ' replied the penitent." 

Anialdo's voice laliercd as he repeated this 
part of the confession, and he was utterly 
imable to proceed. The tribunal, observing 
his condition, allowed him a chair, and, after 
a strugifle of some momi nts. he added, 
"Think, holy fathers, oh, think ! what must 
have been my feelings" at that im»unt ! I 
was myself the lover of the woman whom he 
confessed himself to have murdered." 

"Was she innocent?" said a voice ; and 
Vivaldi, whose attention had lately been fixed 
upon Ansaldo, now, on looking at iichedori, 
perceived that it was he who had spoken. 
At the sound of his voice, the penitentiary 
turned instantly towards him. There was a 
pause of general silence, during which An- 
saldo 's eyes were earnestly fixed uix>n the 
accused. At length he spoke. "She was 
innocent ! " he replied, with solemn empliasis, 
" she was most virtuous I " 

Schedoni had shrunk back within himself ; 
he asked no further. A murmur xan through 
the tribunal, which rose by degrees ti.l it 
broke into audible conversation ; at length 
the secretary w<iS directed to note the ques- 
tion of Schedoni. 

" Was that the voice of the penitent which 
you have just heard?" demanded the in- 
quisitor of Ansaldo. " Remember, you have 
said that you should know it again 1 " 

" I think it was," replied Ansaldo ; " but 
I cannot swear to that.' 

" What infirmity of judgment is this ! " 
said the same inquisitor, who himself was 
seldom troubled with the modesty of doubt 
upon anv subject. Ansaldo was bidden to 
resume the narrative. 

"On this discovery of the murder," said 
the penitentiary, " I quitted the confessional, 
and my senses forsook roe before I could 
deliver orders for the detention of the as- 
sassin. When I recovered, it was too late ; 
he had escaped 1 From that hour to the pre- 
sent I have never seen him, nor dare I amrm 
that the person now before me is he." 

The inquisitof was about to speak, but the 
grand-vicar waved his hand as a signal for 
attention, and, addressing Ansaldo, said, " Al- 
though you may be unacquainted with Sche- 
doni, the monk of the Spiriio Santo, reverend 
father, can you not recollect the person of 
the Count di Bruno, your former fnend ? " 

Ansaldo again looked at St,hedoni with a 
scrutinifiing eye; he fixed it long, bnt the 
countenance of Schedoni suffered no change. 

"No I' said the peniteaiiary, at Unjjth, 
** I dare not take upon me to assert thnt this 
is the Count di Bruno. If it is he, years have 
wrought deeply on his features. That the 
penitent was the Count di Bruno I have proof ; 
he mentioned my name as hvs N\"£\V3t, *xA. 
particular drcumsiaxie^s Vao^uxv ot^'^ vq >^^ 
Count and myseVl ; \i\3X v\iax\^x\«x ^S^eos^w^ 



I^ 



THE ITALIAN. 



was the penitent, I repeftt it, I dare not 
aiRini. 

" But that I dare ! " Mud another voice ; 
and Vivaldi, ttmriog towards it, beheld the 
mysterknis stranger advancing, his cowl now 
thrown bade, and an air of menace over- 
tpTtaAiag every terrific feature. Schedoni, in 
the in$t;uit that he perceived him, seemed 
agitated : his coonteiyuce, for the first time, 
suffered some change. 

The tribunal was profoundly silent, bat 
surprise, and a kind of restless e xp ectation, 
mark^ every brow. Vivaldi was about to 
exclaim. " That is my informer ! " when the 
voice of the stranger checked him. 

" Dost thou know me ? " said he. sternly, to 
SchftdonI, and his attitude became fixed. 

Sch'^.doni gave no reply. 

" Dost thou know me?" repeated his 
accuser, in a steady, solemn voice. 

" Know thee ! " uttered Schedoni, faintlj. 

" Dost thou know this?" cried the stranger, 
raising his voice as he drew from his garment 
what appeared to be a dagger. " D^ thou 
know these indelible stains?" said he, lifting 
the poniard, and, with an outstretched arm, 
pointing it towards Schedoni. 

The confessor tamed away his dace; it 
seemed as if his heart sickened. 

*' With this dagger was thy brother lAsdn 1 " 
said the terrible stranger. "Shall I declare 
myself? " 

Schedoni's courage forsook him, and he 
tank against a pillar of the hall for supjport. 

The consternation was now general; the 
extraordinary appearance and conduct of the 
stranger seemed to strike the greater part of 
the tribunal, a tribunal of the inquisition it- 
self ! with dismay. Several of the members 
rose from their seats ; others called aloud for 
the officials who kept guard at the doors of 
the hall, and inquired who had admitted the 
stranger, while the vicar-general and a few 
inquisitors conversed privately together, dur- 
ing which they frequently .looked at the 
stranger and at Schedoni, as if they were the 
subjects of the discourse. Meanwhile the 
monk remained with the dagger in his grasp, 
and his eyes fixed on tlie comessor, whose face 
was still averted, and who yet supported him- 
self against the pillar. 

At length, the vicar-general called upon 
the members who had arisen to return to their 
seats, and ordered that the officials should 
withdraw to their posts. 

"Holy brethren!" said the vicar, "we 
recommend to you, at this important hour, 
silence and deliberation. Let the examination 
of the accused proceed ; and hereafter let us 
inquire as to the admittance of the accuser. 
For the present, suffer him also to have a 
h'*aring, and the father Schedoni to reply. 

" Wc sufier him," answered the tnbunal, 
a/u/ h WL'd their heads. 
VJyuJdi, who during the tumult had in* 



effisctnally cndcnoond to nuB iriimdi 
beard, now prafited fev the puK vUdt fU- 
lowed the assent of the loouisltx^i to ditaM 
attention ; bat, the lostaiit ne' spdke^ Kvon 
memDcrs iDpaoenuy nane ine fsmiiisiiiOB 
diould procseed, and the grmd-TscBr "WB 
again ofal^ed to ooatmand sQeBbe, befove'flid 
request or Vivaldi oooU be imdentbod. 
Permisson to ^wakbein^ granted him, "Tbat 
person," said be. pomtiiig to die stiinig;erj 
" is the same who visited aoie fai mwJKiaqitt 
and the dagger the same he 0»i oijplMBd 1 
It was he wno commanded me to sumlina 
the penitentiary AnsaMoand tibe bJitier Sd» 
doni. I have acqoicted myself^ and 'fasve 
nothing farther to do in this sti^ggie^'' - - 

The tribunal was again agflBted, sn^ fte 
mnrmiixs of porivate oonvenatioii agpbi 'pra' 
vailed. Meanwhile Sdiedoni appeartd -|o 
have leoovered some dtyree of arfe oMMBid' ; 
he raised himself, and, Doidng totiieisflia|lidt 
seemed preparing to speak } bnt' mulQdt'lffl 
the confusion of sound that fflled fhp InU 

should subside. Atlengthhe'cdtdlbeoklSL 
and, addressing the tribonal, he -ttA-i-V jt -" 



"Holy fathers, the stiaager whd is '&M 

DTlitrl 



before you is an impostor 1 ItriUpn^ 
my. accuser was once my friend. yoti^Jftiif^iiBd 
how much the discovery of l^peAMlr'AMi^ 
me. The charge he Mhgf is- bMh 'faHPtoA 
malidous!" ^"•' 

" Once thy fHeddl" repBed Hie aUtttaCHr, 
with peculiar emphasis, ** and what tais tndll 
me thy enemy ! A^ew these 8pols,*''lie >ipa< 
tinued, pointing to the blade Of fhe ^pck^iA 
" Are they also false and malidcMS ?-cre'tfa(y 
not, on the contnuy, le fl ec t ed on Of tSfr* 
science?" •'■ 

" I know them not,*' reidied Schadgali 
" my conscience is unstained." 

" A brother's blood has stamed it I " sfeU 
the stranger, in a hollow voice, 

Vivaldi, whose attention was now (bad 
upon Schedoni, observed a livid hoe over- 
spread his complexion, and that his ejfes i ma 
averted from this extraordinary person «Mi 
horror : the spectre of his deceased bro&i; 
could scarcely have called forth a s tiume t i 
expression. It was not immediatdy thaflrf 
could command his voice ; when he conldt be 
again appealed to the tribunaL 

" Holy fathers," said he, "suffer me to de- 
fend myself." 

"Holy fathers," sdd the accuser, witfa 
solemnity, *' hear! hear what I shall unfold !* 

Schedoni, who seemed to speak by a Strang 
effort only, again addressed the inqulsitois.; 
" I will prove," said he, "^that this evidence 
is not to be trusted." 

" I will bring such proof to the contraiy ! " 
said the monk. "And here," pointit^'to 
Ansaldo. "is snffident testimony that the 
Count di Bruno did confess himself gaUty 
of murder." 

1\a couxl comtfiaaiA&d tatence, and upon 



THE ITAUAN, 



X59 



the app«al of the sttaneer to Ansaldo, the 
peniteotiaiy was asked whether he knew him. 
He replied that he did not. 

" Recollect yourself," said the grand inoni- 
sitor; "it is of the utmost consequence that 
jou s^ouU be correct on this point." 

The penitentiary observed the stranger 
with deep attention, and then repeated his 
assertion. 

" Have yoa never seen him before ? " said 
an inatilsitor. 

" Never, to my knowledge 1 " replied An- 
saklb. 

The inquisitOES looked upon each other in 
silence. 

*\ He speaks the truth," said the stranger. 

This extr aor dinary fact did not fall to strike 
the tribunal and to astonish Vivaldi. Since 
the accuser confirmed it, Vivaldi was at a loss 
to understand the means by which be could 
have become acquainted with the guilt of 
Schedoni, who, it was not to be supposed, 
. would have acknowledged crimes of such 
magnitude as those contained in the accusa- 
tion to any person, except indeed to his con- 
fessor, and this confessor, it appeared, was so 
lar from having betrayed his trust to the 
accuser, that he did not even know him. 
Vivaldi .waa no less perplexed as to what 
would be the nature of the testimony with 
which the accuser designed to support his 
charges : but the pause of general amazement 
whi(£ had permitted Vivaldi these considera- 
tions was now at an end ; the tribunal re- 
sumed the examination, and the grand inqui- 
sitor called aloud — 

"You, Vincentio di Vivaldi, answer with 
exactness to the questions that shall be put 
to you." 

He was then asked some questions relative 
10 the person who had visit»l him in prison. 
In his answers Vivaldi was dear and concise, 
ooDStantly affirming that the stranger was tibe 
same who now accused Schedoni. 

Wlien the accuser wa$ interrogated, he 
acknowledged,, without hesitation, that Vi- 
valdi had spoken the truth. He was then 
asked -faK| motive for that extraordinary visit. 

'* It-yas," rqilied the monk, " that a mur- 
derer might be brought to justice." 

"This," observed the grand inquisitor, 
" might have been, accomplished by fair and 
Qpeo accusation. If you had known the 
charge to be just, it is probable that you 
would have appealed directly to this tribunal, 
instead of endeavoiving insidiously to obtain 
an influence over the mind of a prisoner, and 
urguiff Um tQ becoqie the instrument of 
briDjnng,the accused to punishment" 

"Yet I hivc not shrunk from discovery," 
observed the stranger, calmly; "I have 
voluntarily appeared." 

At these words Schedoni seemed again 
much agitated/ «nd ^v» drew bis hood over 
biaeyej^. 



"That is just," said the grand inquisitor, 
addressing the stranger; "but vou have 
neither declared your name, nor whence you 
come ! " 

To this remark the monk made no reply ; 
but Schedoni, with reviving spirit, urged the 
circumstance in evidence of the malignity 
and falsehood of the accuser. 

"Wilt thou compel me to reveal my 
proof? " said the stranger. " Darest thou to 
do so?" 

"Why should I fear thee?" answered 
Schedoni. 

"Ask thv oonscience ! " said the stranger, 
with a terrible frown. 

Tlie tribunal again suspended the exami- 
nation, and consulted in private together. 

To the last exhortation of the monk Sche- 
doni was silent. Vivaldi ob&erved that during 
this short dialogue the Confessor had never 
once turned his eyes towards the stranger, 
but apparently avoided him as an object too 
affecting to be looked upon. He judE:ed 
from this circumstance, and from some other 
appearances in his conduct, that Schedoni 
was guilty ; yet the consciousness of guilt 
alone did not perfectly account, he thought, 
for the strong emotions with which he avoided 
the sight of nis accuser— unless, indeed, he 
knew that accuser to have been, not only an 
accomplice in his crime, but the actual 
assassin. In this case it appeared natural 
even for the stem and subtle Schedoni to 
betray his horror on txiholding the person of 
the murderer with the very instrument of 
crime in his grasp. On the other hand, Vi- 
valdi could not but perceive it to be highly 
improbable that the very man who had really 
committed the deed should come voluntarily 
into a court of justice for the purpose of 
accusing his employer ; that he should dare 
publicly to accuse him whose guilt, however 
enormous, was not more so than his own. 

The extraordinary manner also in which 
the accuser had |»>oceeded in the commence- 
ment of the affiur engaged Vivaldi's con- 
sideration ; his apparent reluctance to be 
seen in this process, and the artful and mys- 
terious plan by which he had caused Sche- 
doni to be summoned before the tribunal, 
and had endeavoured that he should be there 
accused by Ansaldo, indicated, at least to 
Vivaldi's apprehension, the fearfulness of guilt, 
and still more, that malice and a thirst of 
vengeance had insiigated his conduct in the 
prosecution. If the stranger had been actuated 
only by a love of justice, it appeared that he 
would not have proceeded towards it in a way 
thus dark and circuitous, but have sought it 
by the usual process, and have produced the 
proofs, which he even now asserted he pos- 
sessed,of Schedoni's crimes. In addition to the 
circumstances, which seemed to strengthftu. 
a supposition of th^ |^<!L«!)stkSs& ^1 ^/^ca.- 



i6o THE ITAUAN. 

acknowledge who he was and whence he Son Angiolo, wid dace that time in fln 
Came. But Vivaldi paused again upon this Splrito Santo." 

point; it appeared to be inexplicable, and "You have been a resident nt the 8a 
he could not imagine why the accuser had Angiolo ?" said the inquisitor, 
adopted a style of secrecy which, if he per- " I have," replied Schedoni ; "and ft M 
sisted in it, must probably defeat the very there that we first lived together in the OCM^ 
purpose of the accusation ; for Vivaldi did fidence of friendship." 
not believe that the tribunal would condemn *' You now perceive how 111 placed 'WM 
a prisoner upon the testimony of a person that confidence," said the inquisitor. "Md 
who. when called upon, should publicly refuse repent, no doubt, of your impmdenoe ? " 
to reveal himself even to them. Yet the The wary Schedoni was not entnqiped bf 
accuser must certainly have considered this this observation. 

circumstance before he ventured into court ; "I must lament a dlsooveiy of ingiadlplib'' 
notwithstanding which, he had appeared I he replied, cahnly, " but the snljeels of lif 
These reflections led ^^valdi to various con- confidence were too pate to give fti*ftHritm tor 
jcctures relative to the visit he had himself repentance." 

received from Uie monk, the dream that had *'This Nicola di Zampaii was .nngnisML 
preceded it, the eztraordinsury means by then? You had rendoed him tertribei?.'' 
which he bad obtuned admittance to the said the inquisitor. 



prison, the declaration of the sentinels that "The cause of his enmity I can wiaBi|^ 
not any person had passed the door, and many plain." observed Schedoni, evading^ for m 
other unaccountable particulars ; and, while present, the question. 
Vivaldi now looked upon the wild physi- " Explain, said the stranger, aolenii^. 
ognomy of the sti anger, he almost fancied, as Schedoni hesitated; some soddeo 
he had formerlv done, that he beheld S(Hne- sideration seemed to ooossion fafm 
thing not of this earth. plexity. 

" I have heard of the spirit of the mur- "I call upon 3rou, in the name of yoor 
dercd," said he, to himself, "restless for dece^^sed brother," said the aocoMT. "to ifr 

justice, becomiag visible in our world " veal the cause of my enmity t *' 

But Vivaldi checked the imperfect thought, Vivaldi, struck by the tone in «l4di tfie 
and though his imagination inclined him to stranger spoke this, turned his ^cs v^ 
the marvellous and to admit ideas which, but knew not how to interpret the 
filling and expanding all the faculties of the visible on his countenance, 
soul, produce feelings that partake of the sub- The inquisitor commanded Schedool la 
lime, he now resisted the propensity, and dis- explain himself; the latter could not 
missed, as al)surd, a supposition which had diately reply, but, when be recovered 
begun to thrill his every nerve with horror, command, he added, 
lie awaited, however, the result of the exa- " I promised this accuser, tfaSs Nieola 
mination, and what might be the further con- Zampari, to assist his preferment widi wl 
duct of the stranger, with intense expecta- little interest I possessed ; it was but 9dk 
tion. Some succeeding circumstances enoon 

When the tribunal had, at length, finally me to believe that I could more than 
determined on the method of their proceed- my piomise. His hopes were d et a l tt l . 




ings, Schedoni was first called upon, and in the fulness of expectation, he was dfM^ 

examined as to his knowledge of the accuser, pointed, for I was myself deceived by lit 

It was the same inquisitor who had formerly person in whom I had trusted. To flia d|^ ! 

interrogated Vivaldi that now spoke. " You, appointment of a choleric man I am IdmK 

father Schedoni, a monk of the Spirito Santo bute this unjust accusation.'* ' ■''■ 



convent, at Naples, otherwise Ferando Count Schedoni paused, and an air of ^ 

di Bruno, answer to the questions whidi tion and anxiety appeared npon Ua 

shall be put to you. Do you know the name His accuser remained silent, but a 1 

of this man who now appears as your smile announced his triumph. 

accuser ? " "You xnvisX declare also the serHco^** mU 

"I answer not to the title of Count di the inquisitor, *' which merited the laariri 
Bruno," replied the confessor, "but I will promised." 

declare that I know this man. His name is '* Those services were meMfanaUe lo ML* 
^'l^i^^u*^* ?TP^-"^. . . .. resumed Schedoni, after a nomcmaiy bHHIh 

'•What i« his odnditjon? " tioo, '• tbongh they cort tt Zteped Ml; 




Aij 



THE ITALIAN. i6i 

aature as the one now before us is capable but a servant of tlie most holy Inquisition. 
of bestowioff the consolations of sympathy ]udf;ing from this part of your evidence, we 
and of friendship ? You must either acknow- must suspect the whole. ' ' 
ledge that services of a less disinterested '* A servant of the Inquisition {"exclaimed 
nature won yoor promises of reward, or we Schedoni, with unaffected surprise. " Kever- 
must conclude that your accuser's charge is end father ! your assertion astonishes nic. 
just Your assertions are inconsistent, and You are deceived, however strar.ge it may 
jour explanation too trivial to deceive for a appear : trust me, you arc deceived ! Vou 
nomenL" doubt the credit of my word ; I therefore will 

"I have declared the truth," said Schedoni assert no more. Hut inquire of Mgnor Vi- 
hanghtily. valdi ; ask him whether he has not often, and 

*' In which instance? " asked the inquisitor; lately, seen my accuser at Napks, and in the 
" for yonr assertions contradict each other I " habit of a monk." 

Schedoni was silent. Vivaldi could not *' I have seen him nt the ruins of Palu/zi, 
radge whether the pride which occasioned near Naples, and in the ecclesiastical dress." 
his silence was that of innocence or of replied Vivaldi, without wailing for the regular 
renone. question, "and under circumittanci's no less 

"It appears, from your own testimony." extraordinary than those which have attended 
said the inquisitor, " that the ingratitude was him here. But, in return fur this fnink 
yours, not your accuser's, since he consoled acknowledgment, I require of you, fatlicr 
yon with kindness, which you have never re- Schedoni, to answer some quLStions which I 
turned biml Have you anything further to shall venture to suggest to the tribunal. liy 
say?'* what means were you informed that I have 

Schedoni was still silent. often seen the stranger at Paluzzi. and wrrc 

"Tbi^ then, is your only explanation ? " you interested or not in his mysterious con- 
added the inquistior. duct towards me there ? " 

Schedoni bowed his head. The inquisitor To these questions, though formally de- 
then, addrearing the accuser, demanded what livered from the tribuned, Schedoni did not 
he had to reply. deign to reply. 

"I havn aothing to reply," said the " It appears, then," said the vicar-general, 
sCraoger, with malidous triumph ; " the ao- " that the accuser and the accused were once 
cosed has replied for me." accomplices. " 

'*We are to conclude, then, that be has The inqu'sitor objected that this did not 
qpoken tmdi when he asserted you to be a certainly appear : and that, on the contrary, 
monk of the Spirito Santo, at Naples ? " said Schedoni seemed to have given his last qucs- 
Ihe inquisitor. tions in despair ; an observation which Vivaldi 

"You, holy father," said the stranger, thou si ht extraordinary from an inquisitor. 

gravely, appealing to the inqu'sitor, "can " Be it accomplices, if it so please you," 

answer for me^ whether I am." said Schedoni, bowing to the grand-vicar, 

Vivaldi listened vfith emotion. without noticing the inquisitor; "you may 

The inquisitor rose from his chair, and call us accomplices, but I say that we were 

witii solemnity replied, " I answer, then, that friends. Since it is necessary to my own 

jon are not a monk of Naples." peace that I should more fully explain some 

" By that reply," said the vicar-general, in circumstances attending our intimacy, I will 

ft low voice to tlu5 in(|uisitor, " I perceive you own that my accuser was occasionally my 

IhiDk liatber Schedom is guilty." agent, and assisted in preserving the dignity 

The r^oiaderofthe inquisitor was delivered of an illustrious family at Naples, the family 

in so low a tone that Vivaldi could not under- of the Vivaldi. And there, holy father." 

atand it. He was perplexed to interpret the added Schedoni, pointing to Vincentio, " is 

■nawer givoi to the appeal of the stranger, the son of that ancient house for whom I 

He thought that the inquisitor would not have attempted so much ! " 

bave ventured an assertion thus positive if Vivaldi was almost overwhelmed by this 

hia opinion had been drawn from inference confession of Schedoni, though he had already 

only ; and that he should know the accuser, suspected a part of the truth. In the stranger 

wbUe he was conducting himself towards him he believed he saw the slanderer of Ellena. the 

as a strdnger. amazed Vivaldi no less than if base instrument of the Marche^a's i>olicy, and 

be bad onderstood the character of an inqui- of Schedoni's ambition ; and the whole of his 

litor to he as artless as bis own. On the conduct at Paluzzi, at least, seemed now in- 

otber hand, he had so frequently seen the telligible. In Schedoni be beheld his secret 

■trajBger at Fshissi, and in the habit of a accuser, and the inexorable enemy whom he 

monk, that he could hardly question the believed to have occasioned the imprisonment 

assertion of Schedoni as to his identity. of EUena. At this latter consideration, all 

The inquisitor, addressing Schedoni, said, circumspection, all prudence forsook him : he 

•• Your evidence we know to be in part erro- declared with energy that from vlV;^xSiOcvft!^w\ 

neous ; your accuser is not a monk of Naples, bad just acknowltdged loYtcYvx^ ^cjtv6\\o.« V< 



■6a TUB ITAUAN. 

kneir him for his went Bcouer, and the bther Aanldo to l.ltest ihe criminality of l]« i 

accuser of EUena. di Rosalba; mA be called Conni dl bimo? The dying contoskm A>' 

upon the tiibiinal to examins into (he DOnfei- the unsiin It oeKblaly of more wagbl.tha i ■ 

■ot'i motives for the accosuion, sad after- aajr other evidence," ' 

mrds to eive heariDK to what he would " I mmiiiaDedtlie falber Anuldo," 

himself unfold. the Kranser, "aa a mcani of proriug'tt 

To this the grand-ylcar replied thai VI- Schedonll* the Cbunt di Bruno. The ot, 

valdi's appeal would be taken into coiuidera- fesiioa of the MMssin stifEiieotlf proves Ita,^ 

tlon ; and he then ordered that the present Count lo tiara been th? instigator of wfl 

businesi shouM proceed. murda', but not tbni Schedoni is ihoCoanL^I 

The inquislioi, addresdng Schedoni, said, " But that ii more than 1 will engage^X 

" The disinterested nature 3l your friendship prove," replied AJtiuIdo. " 1 know it '*ii^ 

ia now suBiciently explained, and (he degree the Count di Binno who confessed (o nie|] 

of credit which is due to your late assertions but I do not knot/ that the father Schedod 

understood. Of you we ask no more, but luni who is now before jne was the pemjDwboSJ 

(0 father Nicola di Zampaii. and demand confessed." ^ 

what he has (D say in suppon of his accusa- "ConscierUiqusly observed !" said (hei.. 

tion. What are your proofs, Nicola dt Zam- ganerBl, lnteinq>tiing the stranger, iUsa 

pari, that he who calls hitnself father Sche- about to reply ; " but you. Nicola di " 

doni l3 Ferando Count di Bruno : and (hat he pari, have not on this head been s "' 

has been guilty of murder, the mutder of his expliolt. How do you know llut 

brother, and of his wife ? Answer (o our fs the penitent who confessed lo A 

ehai^ I " (he vigil of San Marco P " , , 

"To yoar first question." faid the monk, " Reverend fathur. that is (he poinl I «u{.j 

"I reply (hat he has himself acknowledged to about to explaiD," replied itip mnnV ■' tnKL.n 

me, on an occaaon which it is not necessary self accompanied Schedo..., 

(0 mention, that he was the Count di Bmno ; San Marco, (o the church of the Suib) MariK^ 

to the last 1 produce (he poniard, which I re- del Pianto, SI the very hour when dia conM* 

ceived with the dying confession of (he assas- slon is said to have been made- Sd^ - ' - 'I 

sin whom he employed." (old me be was g-^ing to confesson 

"Still, these are not proofs but assertions," when I oliterved lo him his unusual agt, , 

observed tht: vicar-general, "and the first for- bis behaviour implied a consciousness of «V 

bidsour confidencein the second. If, as you traorditiary goili ; he even beliByed it bv, 

declare, Schedoni himsdf aclmowledged (o somewDrris which he dropped in Ibe cnnHKt' 

CUiat he was Count di Bruno, you must slos of his mlnil, I purled with him at (taJ 

B been to him the intimate friend he has gales of the churcb , Hewasiheo ofanonlM- 

declared you were, or he would not have of while friais, and habited as faihar Aiualdo 

confided lo you a secret so dangerous to him- has described. Within n few weeks afterdril, 

self. And, if you were that friend, what con- confession he left his isinueni, forwhatteaMM 

fidence ought we to give to your assertions I never could learn, though I have often sup- 

repectlng (he dagger? Since, whether your mised it, and came lo reside at Ihe SpiHto 

accusations be true or false, you prove Santo, whither 1 also had removed." -. ' 

Jonrsrif guilty of treachery in bringing them " Here is noprool^," snid the vicar-gmBi^ 

arward at all. " " other fiiars of that order might confessat 

Vivaldi was surjirised to hear sneh esndoot [be same hour in the same church." » 

from an inquisitor. " But here is strong presumption forpmp&V 

" Here ii my proof, " said the stranger, who observed the laquisiior. "Holy father, -Wi^ 

1 1 . paper, containing what he most judge from probabilities, as wiJl It 



asserted to be the dying 

asiajsin. It was signed by a priest of Rome, " But probaWlities themse'vea," icp'W *• 

as well as by himself, and ap]wared from Iho vicar-general, " are stiunely against (ba «ll 

dale (0 have been given only a very few dence of a man who would Dstray anolhW | 

weeks before. The priest, he said, was living, by means of woitb dropped in the ungnafM 

and might be summoned- The tribunal moments of powerTul emotion. " 

Issued an order for the apprehension of this " Are these the sentiments of aq iDqlii- 

priest, and that he should be brought to give sltor I " said Vivaldi to himself-- ■'Can SIM* 

evidence on the following evening ; after glorious candour appear amidst the triboMt 

whioh the tnisiness of this night proceeded of an Inquisition! " Tears fell fast lipoid 

without further inlerrupdoti towards its con- Vivaldi's cheek While he ^aied upon IhisjMC 

elusion.' judge, whose candour, had it bean «i«ited Si' 

The vicar-general spoke again. "Nicola di his cause, coulit noi Imve excited nica'e powMK 

Zampnii, I call upon you to say why, if your fill sensations of esteem and admiratkBK' 

protrf of Sehedoid'a guilt is so clear, as the " An inquisitOT I " he repeated to himsd^ 

confession of the assassin himself must make * ' an inqrilsitor 1 " 

A— "Arjw tfiongte fl JUueauji t^mnunoti The &tolar Inqaisitor, howevvr, vruMAf 



tMBlTAUAN. 



i«S 




I npem; that be wu etidrntljr dis- 
9d .bf tbe ■ppeanuoe of Iftmllty 
M noubfoienl disoorered. and im- 
\j 9aiA^. " Has tbe accuser anything 
o use in evidence, that the father 
i is toe penitent who confessed to 
tentianr AJasaldo?" 
m^" replied tbe monk, with asperity. 
X bad left Sdwdonx in the church, I 

without the wdb for his return, 
r to appointment. But he appeared 
uAj sooner than I expected, and in 
of disorder such as 1 nad never wit- 
n him before. In an instant he 
pe^ 90r could my roice arrest his 
." Confusion seemed to reini within 
nib and the convent, and when I 
VPB eotoed, for the purpose of in- 
ne 'occasion of it, the gates' were 
^'i^Csed, andflJl entrance forUdden. 
Me appeared that the monks were 
Orddn^ for the penitent. A rumour 
Sii'.TeBGhed me tnat a confession had 
ha iHstmtxmce ; that the father-con- 
iio happened at that time to be the 
wltonH a i y Ansaldo, had left the chair 
r jef '%faat bad been divulged ftom 
S> tad bad Judged it necessary that a 
MNfld be made for the penitent, who 
i/fM 'fiiar. This report, reverend 
jttdted general attention ; with me it 
l^i^br I thought I knew the penitent. 
n^" the following day I questioned 
( ik to his sudden departure from the 
if 'the Black Penitents, his answers 
tit;* btft emphatic ; and he extorted 

a promise, thoughtless that I was 1 
'^disclose his visit of the preceding 
Id the Santa del Pianto. I then 

. discovered who was the peni- 

'tt then confess to you also?" said 
4|^SDeral. 

luber. I understood him to be the 
69. Whom the report alluded, but I 
wisfidiaa of the nature of his crimes 
ttakstn bmn his confession, the con- 
f which dearly explained the subject 
loni's ; it explained also his motive 
ivonring ever after to attach me to 
at" 

have now," said the vicar general. 
.ve now confessed yourself a member 
mvent of the Spirito Santo at Naples, 
sdmate.of tbe father Schedoni : one 
r many years he had endeavoured to 
r him. Not an hour has passed since 
ed all this ; the n^ative to the latter 
wee was given, it is true, by implica- 
' ; but to the first a direct and ab- 
nial was pronounced ! " 
nled that I am a monk of Naples," 
!ie accuser, "and I appealed to the 
rsstotiietruth of m/ denial. Hehaa 



■dd that I «m noir m lertttit of the mott bolt 
IngoisiUoD." 

Tbe vicar-geoeral, with tome siiiprise, 
looked at tlie inquisitor for explanation ; other 
memben of tbe tribunal did the same ; the 
rest appeared to understand more than they 
had thought it neoenary to avow. The 
inquisitor who had been called upon, rose 
and replied : 

" Nicola di Zampori has spoken the truth. 
It is not many weeks since he entered the holy 
oflioe. A certificate from bis convent at 
Naples bears testimony to the truth of what 
I advance, and procured him admittance 
bore." 

" It is extraordinary that you should not 
have disclosed your knowledge of this penon 
before I " said the vicar-general. 

'* Holy lather, I had reasons," replied the 
inquisitor, "you will recollect that the accused 
was present, and you will understand them." 

** 1 comprehend you, "said the vicar*geiieral, 
"but I do neither approve of, nor perceive 
any necessity for, your countenancing the 
subterfuge ot this Nicola di Zampari relative 
to his identity. But more of this in private." 

"I will explain all there," answered the 
inquisitor. 

" Itappears!then,"re8umedthevicar-general. 
speaking aloud, " that this Nicola di Zampari 
wasformeriy the friend and confidant of father 
Schedoni, whom he now accuses, 'llie accusa- 
tion is evidently malicious ; whether it be also 
false remains to t)e decided. A materisd 
question naturally arises out of tho subject— 
Why was not the accusation brought forward 
l>efore this period ? " 

The monk's visage tnightened with the 
satisfaction of anticipated triumph, and he 
immediately replied : 

** Most holy father i as soon as I ascertained 
the crime. I prepared to prosecute the per- 
petrator of it. A short period only has elapsed 
since the assassin gave his confession. In this 
interval I discovered, in these prisons, signer 
Vivaldi, and immediately comprehended by 
whose means he was confined. I knew enough, 
both of the accuser and the accused, to under- 
stand which of these was innocent, and had 
then a double motive for causing Schedoni to 
be summoned ; I wished equally to deliver 
the innocent and to punish tbe crimincd. The 
question as to the motive for my becoming the 
enemy of him who was once my friend, is 
already answered— it was a sense o\ justice, 
not a suggestion of malice." 

The grand-vicar smiled, but asked no 
further ; and this long examination concluded 
with committing Schedoni again into close 
custody, till full evidence should be obtained 
of his guilt, or his innocence should appear. 
Respecting the manner of his wife's death, 
there was yet no other evidence than that 
which was asserted to be his o^ii c»cv^^^\^t\, 
which, though pecb«|^ iwfiMafitAV> *^v4\moi!i;»^^ 



i64 THE ITAUAN. 

a criminal before the tribunal of the Inquisi- tinguislied Scfaedoni, and little ilid he snapect 

tion, was not enough to satisfy the present that in him, a criininal brought thitlter lei 

vicar-genend, who gave direction that means answer for the guilt of murder — the murder iol 
might be employed towards obtaining proof a brother, and of a wife, he behdd the penot 

of each article of the accusation ; in order of Ellena di Rosalba 1 

that, should Schedoni be acquitted of the Near Schedoni was placed the penitenfiaiy 

ch.irge of having murdered his brother. Ansaldo, the Roman priest, who was to be • 

documents might appear for prosecuting him principal witness, and father Nicola di Zboit 

reii)ecting the death of his wife. pari, upon whom ViVaMi could not even look 

fcjchedoni, when he withdrew from the hall, without experiencing somewhat of the awe 

bowed respectfully to the tribunal, and which had prevailed over his mhid when'be 

whether, notwithstanding late appearances, was inclined to consider the stranger lather 

he were innocent, or that subtlety enabled as a vision of another world than as a bdii| 

him to reassume his usual address, it is of this. The same wfld and indescribable 

certain his manner no longer betrayed any character still distinguished his air* his efoy 

symptom of conscious guilt. His counten- looic and movement, and Vivaldi could not 

ance was firm and even tranquil, and his air but believe that something in the htgfattt 

di^;nified. Vivaldi, who during the greater degree extraordinary would yet be discovered 

part of his examination had been convinced concerning him. 

of his criminality, now only doubted his inno- The witnesses being called over, Vivaldi 

cecce. Vivaldi was himself reconducted to understood that he was placed amoof .then, 

his prison, and the sitting of the tribunal was though he had only repeated the wQi£ wfabdi 

dissolved. father Nicola had spoken, and which, sinM 

— Nicola himself was present as a witness anfaisl 

r^wAiyrT?© vvtv Schedoni, he did not perceive could be m. tiff 

CHAPTER XXIX. least material on the trial. 

WHEN the night of Schedoni's trial ar- When Vivaldi had, in his turn, answered to 

rived, Vivaldi was again summoned to his name, a voice, bursting forth from a dls- 

tliehall of the tribunal. Eveiy circumstance tant part of the hall, exclaimed, "It is my 

was now arranged according to the full cere- master ! my dear master ! " and on diiecdog 

monies of the place ; the members of the his eyes whence it came, he perceived the 

tribunal were more numerous than formerly faithful Paulo struggling with his gnud. 

at the examinations ; the chief inquisitors Vivaldi called to him to be patient, and to 

wore habits of a fashion different from those forbear resistance ; an exhortation, however, 

which before distinguished them, and their which served only to increase the efiforts dl 

turbans, of a singular form and larger size, the servant for liberty, and in the next instant 

lEcemed to give an air of sterner ferocity to he broke from the grasp of the officials, and 

their features. The hall, as usual, was hung darting towards Vivaldi, fell at his feet, sob- 

with black, and every person who appeared ing, and clasping his knees, and ezclaiming. 

there, whether inquisitor, official, witness, or " Oh, my master ! my master 1 have I found 

prisoner, was habited in the same dismal hue, you at last ? " 

which, together with the kind of light Vivaldi, as much affected by this meedng 

diffused through the chamber from lamps as Paulo, could not immediately speak. He 

hung high in the vaulted roof, and from would, however, have raised and embraoed 

torches held by parties of officials who kept his affectionate servant, but Paulo, still cUng- 

watch at the several doors and in different ing to his knees and sobbing, was so modi 

parts of this immense hall, gave a character agitated that he scarcely understood anything 

of gloomy solemnity to the assembly which said to him ; and to the kind assurances aoS 

was almost horrific. gentle remonstrances of Vivaldi, constantly 

Vivaldi was situated in a place whence he replied as if to the officers, whom he Heuiciea 

beheld the whole of the tribunal, and could to be forcing him away, 

distinguish whatever was passing in the hall. •• Remember your situation, Paulo," said 

The countenance of every member was now Vivaldi ; "consider mine aiso,and be governed 

fully displayed to him by the torchmen, who, by prudence." 

armnged at the steps of the platform on "You shall not force me hence!'* cried 

wliich the three chief inquisitors were elevated Paulo ; " you can tike my life only once I If 

extended in a semicircle on either hand of the I must die, it shall be here." 

place occupied by the inferior members. " Recollect yourself, Pau^o. and be COID' 

The glare which the torches threw upon the posed. Your life, I trust, is in no danger." 

latter certainly did not soften the expression Paulo looked up, and again bursting into s 

of faces for the most part sculptured by passion of (ears, repeated, "Oh, my master! 

passions of dark malignity, or fiercer cruelty : my master I where have yoa been all this 

nnd Vivaldi could not bear even to examine while ? are you indeed alive ? I thought I never 

D^i-^^"^', should see you again I I have dreamt a 

'tfefore the bar of the tribunal he dis- buudreOLXvmesWiax^wi view dead and buried I 



THE ITALIAN. 165 

And I wished to bedetd and buried with you. using all potsiUe dfort to n-.ncc li'm, ami 

I thought yon were gone out of this world into was the more alarmed sinco the offici.ils 

the nexL I feared jrou were gone to heaven, made no further attempt to intcrr'ipt I'.uilo, 

smd so bdieied we should never meet again, a forbearance which Vivaldi attribuicd t.j 

But now I see yon once morei and know that maliitnity, and to a wish that IVviI-j mi'.ht 

JDU Jive I GNh, my master I my roaster ! " be entrapped by his own act. At Icr^ji'i l:c 

The offioeia who had followed Paulo, now made liimscif heard. 

cndeaTOuriog to withdraw him, he became " I entreat'' said Vivaldi. 

more outrageous. Paulo btonped for a moment. 

"Do your worst at once," said he ; "but " Paulo ! ' rejoined Vivaldi, earnestly, '- do 

yoa shall find tough work of it, if you try to you love your master?" 

loiee me from henoe. so you had better be " Love my m.ister!" said Paulo, P'^^i-nt- 

oontented with killing me here." fully, without allowing Vivaldi to finish I:-s 

The incensed oflSoals were laying violent sentence, " have I not gone through fire nnd 




•• 



yoa 

*' It is impossible/' replied an officer, "we I love my master!' If you believe, signor. 

dare not." that anything else made me come here, into 

I will promise that he shall not even these dismal holes, you are quite entlrcly out : 
\ to me, if yon will only allow him to be and when they have made an end of me, as I 

i*.," added VivaldL suppose they will do, before all is over, you 

" Not speak to you. master I" exclaimed will, perhaps.think better of nic than to suspect 

Panlo, ** but I wHl stay by you, and speak to that I came here for my own pleasure." 

jrou, as long as I like, till my last gasp. Let *' All that may be as you say, Paulo," re- 

them do their worst at once ; I defy tnero all, plied Vivaldi, coldly, while he with d.fficnlty 

and an the devils of inquisitors at their heels, commanded his tears, '' but your immediate 

too, to force me away. I can die but once, submission is the only conduct that c:in con- 

aad they ooght to be satisfied with that, — so vince me of tim sincerity of your professions. 

what is there to be afraid of? Not speak! " I entreat you to be silent." 

"He knows not what he says,' said ^^ Entreat me ! " s.iid Paulo. "Oh, my 

Vivaldi to tlM officials, while he endeavoured master ! what have I done that it bhould 

to silence Paulo with his hand. " I am certain come to this? Entreat me ! " he repeated, 

that he will submit to whatever I shall re- sobbing. 

^dre of him, and will be endrely silent ; " You will, then, give me this proof of your 

or» If he does speak now and then, it shall attachment ? " asked Vivaldi. 

oolj be in a whisper." " Do not use such a heart-breaking word 

** A whisper 1 " said an officer, sneeringly, again, master," replied Paulo, while he 

"do you suppose, dgnor, that any person is dashed the tears from his cheek, "such a 

snfiered to speak in a whisper here?" heart-breaking word, and I will do any- 

"A whimper 1" shouted Paulo, "I scorn thing." 

to speak in a whisper. I will speak so loud ' ' You submit to what I require then, 

that every word I say shall ring in the ears of Paulo ?" 

an those oki Uack devils on the benches "Aye, signor, if— if it is even to kneel 

yonder ; aye, and those on that mountebank at the feet of that devil of an inquisitor, 

tfage too, Uiat sit there looking so grim and yonder." 

angry, 9A if they longed to tear us in pieces. " I shall only require you to be silent," re- 

They " plied Vivaldi, "and you may then be per- 

" Silence," said Vivaldi with emphasis, mitted to remain near mc" 

" Panlo, I command you to be silent." " Well, signor. well ; I will do as you bid 

"Thev shall know a bit of my mind," con- me, then, and only just say " 

tinued Paulo, without noticing Vivaldi, "I '* Not a syllable, Paulo," interrupted Vi- 

wSl tell them what they have to exjpect for valdi. 

sJl their cruel usage of my poor master. "Only just say, master " 

Where do they expect to go when I hey die. I "Not a word, I entreat you!" added 

wonder? Though, for that matter, they can- Vivaldi, "or you will be removed immc- 

not go to a worse place than they are in diately." 

already, and T suppose it is knowing that " His removal does not depend on that." 

which makes them not afraid of being ever so said one of the officials, breaking from his 

widced. Thev shall hear a little plain truth watchful silence, " he must go, and that with- 

for once in their lives, however, they shall out more delay." 

hour " " What ! affcr 1 have promised not to open 

During the whole of this harangue Vivaldi, my lips ! " said Paulo ; " do you pretend to 

alarmed for the consequence of such impru- break your agreement?" 

dent, though honest indignation, had been " There is no preleac^, «xv^\}cii»^ *U)a\ tc<^ 



THB iTAUAlt. 

"10 dl Bnuwt thotttfi Mi fcl ^ l lBB1w^^fay^^rt^^ 
e for liadafEMledfitnimMFIilmteUiHatfaw.i 

, tm, GDdlnKtb«t[n«iiniec>MiB.«Bdtt|t 

The offidals nMe prOrclked.'Biul Pinlo be- the lami whfaA U* Unttdf ^fircd' MB 

came jtill mpTc earaged aod clamorou*. till dUBcnlty ftora Ui EU^r ««n bpvMief Wflt 
at lengih [he uproai reached the tttbuiul at out remone bjr Maitnella, InataBd. btlRMi 
Ihe Qiher end of the hall, and lUcDce bavlng applied wllh ecodomy to MI tu^poit, be 'Of 
been comniBnacd, an inquinrwas made into fused farther aid tbaa wat ■ ufCa li ui l ftr IV 
theciuseof iheconfusion. The cottseoMOce absolute neeeultles. -•■■**. 

of this was an order that Paulo should with- It would be difficatt fbr a candid mtndto< 
draw from Vivaldi i but as at this moment ba beliere ho* « ooBduct so rea.'.onable couU 
fea.re)l no Kieater evil, he gave his refusal to possibly eidte faatied fn any breast, or tkC 
the tiibunal with as linle ceremony as he had the power of aelGsbueK could so far wttp>' 
done berore to the officials. any understandlDB at tx> induce MarincBa. I 

Al I'-ngth, after much difficulty, a sort of whom we will in nitnre a^ain call ScbedoQ^^ 
compromise was made, and Fnulo bdnjt to look upoa bit brothrr wiib detestaflob-J 
aooihed by his master into some degree of because he bad refused to ruin bimsdf 'tfcKi 
compliance, was sulTered to remaio wltbia bli kiDnwo might i«Kl I Yet it la cerlaiB I 
a fihoTt distance of him. that Schedoni, lenning the necessary ^v i 

The business of the trial soon after com- deuce of d] Bnno to be meanness and cold ■ 
menced. Aasaldo, Ihe penllenliary, and in*eiisfbfli^ to tbeeomtetof otlieis, snSend-j 
father Nicola appeared ai witnesses, as did full aa mach reMOtmcnl towards faim btM\ 
also the Roman priest who had assisted la system a^ he ^d from passion. thoQgh thti 
taking the depo^uons of the dying assassin, meanness and the insensibility he ImBgioedi' 
He had been privately inlerrogated, and bad in his bntho't character were not only re^' 
given clear and satisfactory evidence as to trails in hlf Own, but were displayhtg then^1 
the trulfa of Ihe paper produced by Nicola, selves iu'the vaTO^Siuiunts he urged sgafniE ' 
Other witnesses also had been subpisnaed, them. ' .' ' 

whom Schedoni had no expecta.lian of meet- The rancour thus excited was cherished! 
ing. by innumerable drcumsiances, and rlpeneS ' 

The deportment of [he confessor, on Erst by envy, that meanest and most malignant' 
entering the hall, was coIiei:[ed nnd firm ; it of human passions : by envy of di Brlinc^ 
remained unchanged when [he Roman priest biessings, o( an unencumbered estate, and of ' 
was brought forward ; but, on ihe appearance a beautiful wife, he was templed to perpetrate; 
of another witness, his courage seemed to the deed whicli might Itaniler those blesS-' 
biter. Before this evidence was, however, ings to himself, Spalalro. whom be eoft" 
called far, the depositions of Iheassas'inwere ployed to this purpose, vos well knoiBtlMa 
publicly read. They stated with the closest him, and he did not fear to connde On Gatv 
conciseneu the chief (acts, of which the duct of the crime to this man;' Wfao DU M 
following is a somewhat more dilated oar- purchase a little habitation, on di^ iiliiilit' 
ratlve. shore of the Adriatic, and, with a CMala 

Ii appeared that about the year 174a Ihe stipend, to reside there. Tte rUbitiBI 4M£ 
late Count di Bruno bad passed over into ling to which Ellena bad beta ^tanM, W 
lasoliiary situation suited S4hedonn-tfiw^' 

, ..-...-a .—.f, f :.-, Jas taken for him, 

tditated to take advantage of. Though a Schedoni, who had good httdUgeacVcf IB 
lawless passion had first suggested to the di Bruno's movements, acqnablted SpallMi^'' 
dark mind of Schedoni the atrocious act frcm time to time, with his exact sltnaUdB: 
whichshoulddeslroya brother, manycircum- and it Was after di BruDD, on his rttnitLud. 
stances end considerations had conspired crossed the Adriatic, Irom Itocml 1* Sbif»-' 
to urge him towards its accompliihrnent. ftedonia. and was enterjiig upon thnwMOl 
Amont>ihes<^w»sthe conduct of Ihe late Count of the Garganus, Ihat^»atro, Willi Us eott' 
towards himself, whii:h, however reasonable, rade, overtook him. T%ey Gi«dat (heCMtilt' 
as it had contradic[ed his own selfish grad- and bis attendants, who were only a lalw 
Stations, and added strong reproof to op- and a guide of Ihe countiy ; and, CO 

Gsilion, had excited his most inveterate among the thickets, thtfy sscntdy n 
tied, Schedoni, who, asa younger brother the attack. The shot did t»Ot imOM 

of his family, bore at that time the title of succeed, and the Count, look' 

Count di Marinella, had dissipated his small discover his enemy, prepared to 

patrimony at a very early age ; bul though self , but the firing was so rapidly -s 

suffering might then have taught him pru- that, at length, both di Bruno bm' '-^ <eT*aii(' 
dence, it had only encouraged hira in du- fell, covered with wounds. Tlit nuiiie lied. ' 
plidty, and rendered bim more eager to seek The unfortunate travdleis were bnlad bj 
a temporary refuge in the same habits of ex- their assassins on Ihe spot : but whether ttai 
traragaace wbiai hni led 10 il. The Count sniplcioo which attends upon the coiiNioai- 



THB ITAUAN. 167 

ness of guilt pronmted Spaktro to guard himself from an assassin. The wounds, how- 
against every posslbUitjr of being betrayed ever, of Spalatro did not so much disable 
by the aooom|woe of bis crime, or whatever him but that he proceeded towards Rome 
was the modfs^ he returned to the forest from the town whence the paning road had 
alone, and, shronded by night, removed the conducted his master to Naples, 
bodies to a pit which he had prepared under The fatigue of a lonr journey, performed 
the floorii^ of the house where he lived, chiefly on foot.inSpalatros wounded condition, 
thus displadng all proof should his accom- occasioned a fever that terminated toj^'cther 
plice hereafter point out to justice the spot in his journey and his life ; and in hii last hours 
which be had assisted to deposit the mangled he had unburdened his conscience by a full 
remains of di Bruno. confession of his guilt. Tlie priest who, on 

Scbedoni contrived a plausible history of this occasion, had been sent for, alarmed by 
the shipwreck of his brother upon the the importance of the confeShion, since it 
Adria^c, and of the loss of the whole crew ; implicated a living person, cajled in a friend 
and as no persons but the assassins were as witness to the depositions. This witness 
acquainted with the real cause of his death, was father Nicola, the former iniimate of 
the guides who had fled, and the people at Schedoni, and who was of a chamcter to 
the onhr town he had passed through since rejoice in any discovery which miglit punish 
he landed, bdng Ignorant even of the name a man from whose repeated promises he had 
of di Bmno, there was not any circumstance received only severe disappointments. 
to contradict the falsehood. It was univer- Schedoni now T)erceivea that all his designs 
sbHj credited, and even the widow of the against Spalatro had failed, and he had 
Coont had, perhaps, never doubted its truth ; meditated more than have yet been fully dis- 
or if, after her compelled marriage with Sche- closed. It may be remembered that on 
doni, -hif conduct did awaken a suspicion, it parting with the peasant, his conductor, the 
was too vague to produce any serious conse- confessor gave him a stiletto, to defend him, 
quenbe. as he said, from the attack of Spalatro in 

DminiC the reading of Spalatro's confes- case of encountering him on the road. The 
sion, and, particularly at the conclusion of it, point of this instrument was tipped with 
the snrpqrue and dismay of Schedoni were poison, so that a scratch from it was sufli- 
too poWafnl for cono^ment; and it was cient to inflict death. Schedoni had for many 
not toe lieast considerable part of his wonder years secretly carried about him such an 
tiiat Spalatro should have come to Rome for envenomed insrument, for reasons known 
the purpose of making these depositions ; only to himself. He had hoped that, should 
bat nsrtber oon^eradon gave him a conjee- the peasant meet Spalatro, and be provoked 
tme of the truth. to defend himself, this stiletto would ter- 

The accooht which Spalatro had given of minate the life of his accomplice, and relieve 
his motive for this journey to the priest was him from all probability of discovery, since 
»^y t, having lately understood Schedoni to the other assassin whom he employed had 
be resident at Rome, he had followed him been dead several years. The expedient 
thittier with an intention of relieving his failed in every respect. The peasant did not 
conscience by an acknowledgment of his even see Spalatro ; and, before he reached 
own crimes and a disclosure of Schedoni's. his home, he luckily lost the fatal stiletto, 
ThiSi however, was not exactly the fact, which, as he had discovered himself to be 
The design of Spalatro was to extort money acquainted with some circumstances con- 
from the guilty confessor ; a design from nected with the crimes of Schedoni, the 
which the latter bdieved he had protected confessor would have wished him to keep, 
himself, as well as from every other evil con- from the chance that be might some time 
sequence, when he misled his late accomplice injure himself in using it. The poniard, 
ittpecting his place of residence, little fore- however, as he had no proper means of 
Mdngthat the very artifice which should fastening it to bis dress, had fallen, and was 
jKnd' this man in search of him to Rome, carried away by the torrent he was crossing 
instead of Naples, Would be the means of at that moment. 
bringing his crimes before the public. But if Schedoni had been shocked by the 

Spalatro had followed the steps of Sche- confession of tlie assassin, his dismay was 
riooias far as the town at which he slept on considerably greater when a new witness was 
the first night of his journey ; and, having brought forward, and he perceived an ancient 
flieie passed him, had reached the Villa di domestic of his house. This man identified 
Cambnisca, when, perceiving the confessor Schedoni for Ferando, Count di Bruno, with 
aporbaching, he had taken shelicr'from ob- whom he had lived as a servant after the denth 
fiCTVation within the ruin. The motive of the Count his brother. And not only did 
which before made him shrink from notice he bear testimony to the person of Schedoni, 
had contributed, and still did so, to a sus- but to the death of the Countess, his wife. 
mcion that he aimed at the Ufe of Schedoni, Giovanni declared hmiself to be one of the 
who in wounding hitn," believed he had saved domestics who had assisted in convcYin^ hfix 



if,3 THE ITALIAN. 

to her apartment after she had been struck by the ddivery of the eWdOMse, dinppeand 

ih(^ poniard of Schedoni, and who had after- when his fate became certain, and inieii tbB 

wards attended her funeral in the church of dreadfid sentence of the law waiproiioanced 

the Santa del Miracoli. a convent near the it made no visible impressioa on Us miad. 

late residence of di Bruno. He further From that moment, bis firmness i or his faanfr 

affirmed that the physicians had reported her hood, never forsook bim. 
deiith to be in consequence of the wound she Vivaldi, who witnessed tlus oondftmiwHoB, 

had received, and he bore witness to the flight appeared infinitely more affected by it thn 

of his master previous to the death of the himself ; and though in revealing the Gi^ 

Countess, and immediately upon the assassi- cumstance of father Nicola's summons, wUdb 

nation, and that he had never publicly ap- had even'ually led to the discovery of Sdit- 

pcarcd upon his estate s<nce that period. doni's crimes, he had not been left a cboiR' 

An inquisitor asked whether any measures in his conduct, be felt, at this moment, aft 

had bfen taken by the relations of the deceased miserable as if he had actually l)rme whnoi 

lady toward a prosecution of the Count. against the life of a fellow being. What, thou 

Ttie witness replied that a long search had would have been his feelings had he beia 

been made for the Count for such a purpose, told that this Schedoni, thus condemned, wai 

but that he had wholly eluded discovery, and the father of Ellena di Rosalba I But, what 

that, of course, no further step had been taken ever these might be, he was soon condeiaqfld 

in the affair. This reply appeared to occasion to experience them. One of the most poncv- 

diosatisfaction. The tribunal was silent, and ful of Schedoni's passions appeared even in 

seemed to hesitate ; the vicar-gcneral then this last scene ; and as, in quitting the td- 

addressed the witness. bunal, he passed near Vivaldi, he ultaeA 

" How can you be certain that the person these jfew words : " In me yon have mmdeSMl 

now before you, calling himself father Sche- the father of Ellena di Rosalba !" 
doni, is the Count di Bruno, your former Not with any hope that the interceaariott flf 

master, if you have never seen him during the Vivaldi, himself also a prisoner, ocmld in tfia 

long interval of years you mention ? " least mitigate a sentence prono o nced hj tht 



Giovanni, without hesitation, answered that, Inquisition, did he say (his, but for tte pof- 
though years had worn the features of the pose of revenging hknself for the evil wnich 
Coimt, he recollected them the moment he Vivaldi's evidence had contributed to pre d ne^ 
beheld him ; and not the Count only, but the and inflicting the exquisite misery sadi fofal^ 
person of the penitentiary, Ansaldo, whom mation must give. The attempt m c c a edBd 
he had seen a frequent visitor at the house of too welL 

di Bruno, though his appearance also was At first, indeed, Vivaldi judged this to bt 
considerably changed by time, and by the c nly the desperate assertion of a man who 
ecclesiastical habit which he now wore. believed his last chance of f H w api ny tht 

Tlie vicar-general seemed still to doubt the rigour of the law to rest with him ; aad, at 
evidence of this man, till Ansaldo himself, on the mention of Ellena. forgetting eiveiy pr^ 
being called upon, remembered him to have caution, he loudly demanded to know bsr 
been a servant of the Count, though he could situation. Schedoni, tibrowine upon hfan a 
not identify the Count himself. horrible smile of triumph and deririoa, was 

The grand inquisitor remarked that it was passing forward without replying, bat V^ 
extraordinary he should recollect the face of valdi, unable to support this state of vn- 
tlie servant, yet forget that of the master, certainity, asked permission of the tribunal 
with whom he had lived in habits of intimacy, to converse for a few moments with the 
To this Ansaldo replied that the stronger prisoner, a request which was granted wiih 
I^assions ot Schedoni. together with his extreme reluctance, and only on oonditko 
porticular habits of li'e. might reasonably be that the conversation should l>e pubha 
supposed to have wrought a greater change To Vivaldi's questions as to tlie sitnatioo 
upon the features of the Count than the of Ellena. Schedoni only replied that she 
character and circumstances of Giovanni's was his daughter, and the solemnity whkh 
could have effected on his. accomp>anied these repeated assertion^ tfaoudi 

Schedoni, not without reason, was appalled it failed to convince Vivaldi of »lii« Xr^^ 
on the appearance of this servant, whose occasioned him agonizing doubt and apple* 
further testimony gave such clearness and hension ; but when the confessor, penSviK 
force to some other parts of the evidence that the policy of disclosing her place ofiesidaioe 
the tribunal pronounced sentence upon Sche- to Vivaldi, softened from his desire of vco- 
doni as the murderer of the Count his brother, gence to secure the interest of his familT, and 
and as this, the first charge, was sufficient named the Santa della Pietaas her pieaent 
for his condemnation to death, they did not asylum, the joy of such intelligence ovcr^ 
proceed upon the second, that which related came, for a time, every' other ccmsldenu 
lo nis wife. tion. 

vi^^lrl-^^^ betrayed by Schedoni on the To this dialogue, however, the officials pot 
ipearancc ctf the last witness; and during a speedy conclusion. Schedoni was led badfe' 



THE ITAUA.W 



lOi 



to his oeU, and Vivaldi was soon after ordered 
to his formor cloie confioement. 

But Paulo became a^^n outrageous when 
he was about to be Separated from his master, 
till the latter, having petitioned the tribunal 
that his servant might accompany him to his 
prison, aud received an absolute refusal, en- 
deavoured to calm thb violence of his depair. 
He fell at his master's feet and shed tears, 
but be uttered no further complaints. When 
he rose, he tnmed his eyes m silence upon 
Vivaldi, and they seemed to say, "Dear 
master 1 I shall never see you more ! " and 
with this sad expression he continued to 
gaze on him tlU he had left the hall. 

Vivaldi, notwithstanding the various sub- 
jects of his distress, could not bear to meet 
the piteous looks of this poor man, and he 
withdrew his eyes ; yet, at every other srep he 
took, they oonsiantly returned to bis faithful 
servant, til! the doors folded him from sight. 

When he had quitted the hall. Vivaldi 
pleaded, however hopelessly, to the officials 
in &voar of Paulo, entreating that they would 
speak to the persons who kept guard over 
mm, and prevail ¥dth them to show him every 
allowable indulgence. 

*'No iadok^ence can be allowed him," 
replied one of the men, " except bread and 
water, and the liberty of walking in his cell." 

•' No €ikirr said Vivaldi. 

"None^" repeated the official. "This 
prisoner has been near getting one of his 
guards into a scrape already, for somehow or 
other he so talked him over and won upon 
him (for he is but a young one here) that the 
man let him have a light, and a pen and ink ; 
but, luckily, it was found out before any harm 
was done. 

* * And what became of this honest fellow ? " 
inquhed VivaldL 

*' Honest 1 he was none so honest, either, 
signor, if he could not mind his duty." 

" Was he punished, then ? " 

" No, signor," replied the man, pausing, 
and looking back upon the long avenue they 
wwe passing, to inquire whether he was 
observed to hold this conversation with ^ 
prisoner ; '* no, signor, he was a younker, so 
they let him off for once, and sent him to 
gnittd a man who was not so full of his coax- 
mg ways." 

'* PmiIo made him merry, perhaps? " asked 
Vivaldi. '* What were the coaxing ways you 
qwkeof?" 

" Meny, signor 1 no ; he made him cry, 
and that was as bad." 

" Indeed 1 " said Vivaldi. " The man must 
have been here, then, a very short time." 

" Not more than a month or so, signor." 

"But the coaxing ways you tallced of." 
repeated Vivaldi "what were they?— a ducat 
or so?" 

"A ducat!" exclaimed the man "No I 
not a pBucHo } " 



" Ari! you sure of that?" ciiivl Viv.lli, 
shrewdly. 

"Aye, sure enough, signt.r. Thi- f*i! ■.•.■,■ 
is not worth a ducaiin thi; world." 

"But his master is, fricntl," observe I \'i- 
valdi. in a very low voice, while he \mt j:'.:ih: 
money into his hand. 

The officer made no answer, but con-'i Ai- 1 
the money, and nothing further was .said. 

Vivaldi had given this as a bribe to pnv tin* 
some kindness for his servant, not frum iuiy 
consideration of himself, for his own critic.il 
situation had ceased at this time to be a sub- 
ject of anxiety whh him. His mind was at 
present strangely agitated between emotions 
the most opposite in their nature, t!i«.' j .v 
which a discovery of Kllena's safety inspln'rl, 
and the horrible suspicion that Schtdoni's 
assurances of relationship occa^tioiud. 'I'li.ii 
hi-i Ellena was the daughter of a niurdcrcr. 
that the father of Ellena should be brought 
to ignominious death, and that he himself, 
however unintentionally, should have a&sisted 
to this event, were considerations almost too 
horrible to be sustained ! Vivaldi sought 
refuge from them in various conjectures as to 
the motive which might have induced Sche- 
doni to assert a falsehood in this instance, 
but that of revenge alone appeared plausible ; 
and even this siu'mise was weakened when he 
considered that the confessor had assured him 
of Kllena's safety, an assurance which, as Vi- 
valdi did not detect the selfish policy con- 
nected with it, he believed Schedoni would 
not have given had his general intent towards 
him been malicious. But it w<is possible that 
this very information, on which all his com- 
fort reposed, might be false, and had been 
given only for the purpose of inflicting the 
anguish a discovery of the truth musr lead to. 
With an anxiety so intense as almost to over- 
come his faculty of judging, he examined 
every minute ^probability rt lative to this po nt, 
and concluded with believin:j that Schedoni 
had, in this last instance at least, spoken 
honestly. 

Whether he had done so in his first asser- 
tion was a qiiesrion which had raist-d in 
Vivaldi's mind a tempest o^ conject re and 
of horror ; for, while the subject of it was 
too astonish'n^ to be fu'lv bclievrd. it was 
also too dre^tdful not to be apprehended even 
as a possibility. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

WHILE these events were passing in the 
prisons of the Inquisition at Rome, 
Ellena, in the sanctuary of Our I^dy of 
Pity, remained ignorant of Schcdoni's arrest, 
and of Vivaldi's situation. She understood 
that the confessor was preparing to acknow- 
ledge her for his daughter, and believed that 
she comprehended also lYve mci\\N<i ^qx "Vs^^ 
absence ; but, thoMg,\\ \\e Y\«A tofcA^^wv \\« 



170 THE JTAUAlf. 

to expect a visit from him till his arranpfement an empurpling and reposing hafl^ %lildi oiw* 

should be completed, he had promised to spread the waten and the beafcaib ud 

write in the meantime, and inform her of all blended in soft con fu sion vnxj featonoffte 

the present circumstances of Vivaldi. PIis landscape. The roofi and siitndcr Wfktm flC 

unexpected silence bad excited, therefore, the Santa della Pfeta, with a dngKi tovsT of 

apprehensions as various, though not so the church rising lottilj over evwy othvjMrt 

terrible, as those which Vivaldi had suffered of the buildings that compos e d the uuuviHli 

for her ; nor did the silence of Vivaldi him- were fading fast firom theejre ; hot thesolSHB 

self appear less extraordinary. tint that invested them accorded so wcH wili 

" His confinement must be severe indeed," their style that Ellena was unvdIUng'to fs- 

said the afflicted Ellena, " since he cannot liequish this interesting object. Bnddcaly 

relieve my anxiety by a single line of intelli- she perceived throcufh the dubiooB IMI m 

gence. Or, perhaps harassed by unceasing unusual number of moving fignras m -tti 

opposition, he has submitted to the command court of the great doistar, and. Ilslimil^ 

of his family, and,, has consented to ioTg^i fancied she conld distingaidi the mamiiifiqg 

roe. Ah ! why did i leave the opportunity of many voices. The white dratMTf of ns 

for that command to his family ; why did I nuns rendered them consplcnoiw as- thsf 



not enforce it myself ! ^' moved, but it was impossilde to 

Yet, while she uttered this self-reproach, who were the individuals engaged ia' ddi 
the tears she shed contradicted the pride bustle. Presently the assemblage dispmd ; 
which had suggested it ; and a conviction and Ellena, cnrioos to undentand the' 



lurking in her heart tliat Vivaldi coiild not so sion of what she had obserfed, tuepaied to 

resign her soon dissipated those tears. But descend to the convent. 

other conjectures recalled them ; it was pos- She had left the terrace, and waa- tflOM«ta 

sible that he was ill— that he was dead. enter a long avenne of chestnuts^ titat-^aa- 



In such vague and gloomy surmise her tended to a part of the convent 
days passed away; employment could no ing immediately vrith the great oomt, Whea 
longer withdraw her from herself, nor music, she heard approaching steps, and, on tmnhy 
even for a moment, charm away the sense of into the w£uk, perceived sevtnal peno M ad^ 
sorrow. Yet she regularly partook of the vancing in the shady distance. ■AnMW tta 
various occupations of the nuns, and was voices, as they drew nearer, she diadmiDned 
so far from permitting herself to indulge in one whose interesting tone engaged U Iwr 
any useless expression of anxiety, that she attention, and began also toawafcea itesaciy. 
had never once disclosed the sacred subject She listened, wondered, doubted, hopeda attd 
of it ; so that, though she could not assume feared. It spoke again I EUeiia thoaght 
aa air of cheerfulness, she never appeared she could not be deceived in those teaiaar 
otherwise than tranquil. Her most soothing, accents, so full of intelligenoe, so aipifalwi 
though perhaps most melancholy, hour was of sensibility and refinements She- yoh 
when about sunset she could withdraw un- ceeded with quicker steps, yet £sdtierad aa-sbe 
noticed to the terrace among the rocks that drew near the group, and paused to-laqoiie 
overlooked the convent and formed a part of whether among them was any -&iiri -tfai 
its dom&m. There, alone and relieved from might accord with the voice and jnsti%^har 
all the ceremonial restraints of the society, hopes. 

her very thoughts seemed more at liberty. The voice spoke again. It pron ou ac wT her 
As from beneath the litiht foliage of the name, pronounced it with the tnanWIingS 
acacias, or the more majestic shade of the of tenderness and impatience, .and- BItea 
plane trees that waved their branches over scarcely dared to trast her senses wfaaandie 
the many coloured cliffs of this terrace, beheld Olivia, the nun of San StflfiiliOf , la 
Ellena looked down upon the magnificent the cloisters of La Pieta I ' ' •■' 

scenery of the bay, it brought back to Ellena could find no words to ^itplisi. hsr 
memory, in sad yet pleasing detail, the many joy and surprise on bdiolding -her {MMT 
happy days she had passed on those bhie in safety, and in these c^et groffehj hot 
waters, or on the shores, in the society of Olivia repaid all the affectionate eaieSstt pi 
Vivaldi and her departed relative, Bianchi ; her young friend, and, while she piomiiBd to 
and every point of the prospect marked by explain the circumstances that haidled'tb-har 
such remembrance, whic^ the veiling distance present appearance hqre, she, in hef -tom, 
stole, was rescued by affection, and pictured made numerous inquiries relative to, Enarfa*! 
by imagination in tints more animated than adventures after she had quitted San^SlMGfaio. 
hose of brightest nature. They were now, however, sufToiAidad.hjrido 

One evenmg Ellena had lingered on the many auditors to allow of ti meaer ^ e d ctever- 
terrace later than usual. She had watched sation. Ellena. therefore, led the nab -to' her 
the rays retiring from the highest points of apartment, and Olivia then explalaOtf Iwr 
the horizon, and the fading imagery of the reasons for having left the. conv»t oT'SaB 
lower scene, till the sun having sunk into the Sleiaxio, viYvxcK were indeed ahmclAit to 
fyaves, all colouring was withdrawn, except i^sU^Vi tNeiiV\^\>aftTawfc.f^6il<H«Q»aa,her 



THE ITAUAN. lyt 

conduct as to the change. This unfortunate soon as the ceremonies attendin£f an intro- 
reduse, it a ppe are d, persecuted by the sus- duction to the superior were over, I requfsted 
pidons of the abbess, who understood that to be conducted to you, and was in search of 
she had assfsted in the liberation of Ellena, you when we met in the avenue. It is un- 
had petitioned the bishop of her diocese for necessary fur mc tu insi^t u|K>n the s:itisfac- 
leave to remove to La Pieta. The abbess tion which this meeiin^ giv^s inc ; Imt you 
had not proof to proceed formally against may not, perhaps, understand how mucti the 
her, as an accomplice in the escape of a nanncrs of our lady abl>«-ss, and of the 
novice, fot though J eronimo could have sup- sisterhood in general, as far as a first inter- 
{died the reqiusite evidence, he was too view will alio ^ nie to judge of them, have re- 
dea>ly implicated in this adventure to do so animated me. The gloom which has long '. 
without betraying his own^conduct. Ftom hung over my prospects seems now to oi)en, 
his having withhdd such proof, it appears, and a distant gleam promises to light up the 
however, that acddent rather than design evening of my stormy day." 
had occasioned his foilure on the evening of Olivia paused, and appeared to recollect 
EUena's departure from the monastery. But, herself. This was the first time she had made 
tboiu[h the abbess had not testimony enough so direct a reference to her own misfortunes ; 
for legal punishment, she was acquainted and while EUena silently remark*;d it, and 
with circumstances sufficient to justify sus- observed the dejection which was already 
pidon, and had both the inclination and the stealing upon the expressive counten.mce of 
power to render CMivia very miserable. the nun. she wished, yet feared, to lead her 

In her choice of La neta, the nun was back towards the subject of then*. 
influenced by many considerations, some of Endeavouring to dismiss some painful re- 
wfaich were the consequence of conversations membrance, and assuming a smile of languid 
she bad hdd with Ellena respecting the state gaiety. Olivia said. " Now that I have related 
of thai aodety. Her design she had been the history of my removal, and sufficiently 
unable to disclose to her firiend, lest, by a indulged my egotism, will you let me hear 
dlacofery of such correspondence, the abbess what adventures have befallen you, my young 
cf Son StdBuio should obtain grounds on friend, since the melancholy adieu ^ou gave 
wfaidi to proceed against her. Even in her me in the gardens of San Stef^ino ?' 
appeal to the Inshop the utmost caution and This was a task to which Ellena 's spirits, 
aecrecy bad .been necessary, till the order for though revived by the presence of Olivia, 
ber removal, proctired not without consider- were still unequal. Over the scenes of her 
able dday and difficulty, arrived, and when past distress Time had not yet drawn his 
it came, the jealous anger of the superior shadowing veil ; the colours were all too fresh 
rendered an inunediate departure necessary, and garish for the meek dejection of her eye, 

Olivia, during many years, had been un- and the subject was too intimately connected 
happy in her tocal circumstances, but it is with that of her present anxiety to be re- 
probalde she would have conduded her days viewed without very panful feelings. She 
withiii the walls of San Stefano, had not the therefore requested Olivia to spare her from a 
aggravated oppression of the abbess aroused detail of particulars, which she could not 
her coinage and activity, and dissipated the recollect but with extreme rductance ; and, 
deraondency with which severe misfortune scrupulously observing the injimction of Sche- 
tpd obscured ber views. doni, she merdy mentioned her separation 

. EUeoa was particular in her inquiries from Vivaldi upon the banks of the Celano, 
whether any .person of the monastery had and that a variety of distressing circumstances 
suffered for the assistance they had given had intervened before she could regain the 
her ; and learning that not one, except Olivia, sanctuary of Delia Pieta. 
had been even suspected of befriending her, Olivia understood too well the kind of 
she understood that the venerable friar, who feelings from which Ellena was desirous of 
had dared to unfasten the gate which restored escaping to willingly subject her to a renewal 
lier, with Vivaldi, to liberty, had not been in- of them, and felt too much generous com- 
Toived by his kindness. passion for her sufferings not to endeavour to 

" It is an embarrassing and rather an un- soothe the sense of them by an exertion of 
usual drcumstance," conduded Olivia, •' to those delicate and nameless arts which, while 
change one's convent ; but you perceive the they mock detection, fascinate the weary spirit 
Btrong reasons which determined me upon a as by a charm of magic. 
removal. I was, however, perhaps the more The friends continued in conversation till 
impatient of severe treatment since you, my a chime from a chapel of the convent sum- 
sister, had described to me the sodety of moned them to the last vespers ; and when 
Our Lady of Pity, and since I believed it the service had concluded they separated for 
possible that you mic^ht form a part of it. the night. 

When, on my arrival here, I learnt that my With the society of La Py^XSl OXmaL \«A 
wishes had not decdved me on this point, I thus found an as^Varcv ^M<dl[i ^& >^\ax^\^ ^^ 
iraf impM^eaf to see/ou once more, and as had never ^ated Xo Vio^ loi, \sm\.«^qv^^ ^"^ 



172 THE ITALIAN, 

frequently expressed her sense of this blessing, ' 'Aye, lady ; you will say that is pcetty good 

it was seldom without tears ; and Elleoa ob- authority." 

served with some surprise and more disap- '* Death ! and in the Marchese's family I " 

pointment, within a very few days after her exclaimed EUena. 

arrival, a cloud of melancholy spreading "Yes.signora; I had it from his own servant. 

again over her mind. He was passing by the garden-gate just as I 

But a nearer interest soon withdrew Ellena's happened to be speaking to the macaroni- 
attention from Olivia to fix it upon Vivaldi ; man. But you are ill, lady I " 
and when she saw her infirm old servant, " I am very well, if you will but proceed," 
Beatiice, enter a chamber of the convent, she replied EUena, faintly, while her eyes were 
anticipated that the knowledge of some extra- fixed up>on Beatrice as if they only had power 
ordinary, and probably unhappy event had to enforce her meaning. 
brought her. She knew too well the circura- " ' Well, dame,' he says to me, * I have not 
spection of Schedoni to believe that Beatrice seen you of a long time.' ' No,' says I, ' that 
cime commissioned from him ; and as the is a great grievance truly ; for old women 
uncertain situation of Vivaldi was so con- nowadays are not much thought of ; out 
stantly the subject of lier anxiety, she im- of sight, out of mind with them, nowft- 

mcdiately concluded that lier servant came days '" 

to announce some evil lelative to him— his " I beseech you to the purpose, "interrupted 
indisposition ; perhaps his actual confinement EUena. " Whose death did he announce? ** 
in the Inquisition, which lately she had some- She had not courage to pronounce Vivaldi's 
limos been inclinui to think might not have name. 

been a mce menace to Vivaldi, though it had " You shall hear, signonu I saw he looked 
proved to be no more to herself ; or possibly in a sort of a bustle, so I asked him how. aU 
she came to tell of his death — his death in did at the Palazzo ; so be answers, ' Bad 
those prisons ! This last was a possibility enough, signora Beatrice ; have not you 
that almost incapacitated her for inquiring heard?' ' Heard,' says I ; ' what should t have 
what was the errand of Beatrice. heard ? ' ' Why,' says be, *of what has just 

The old servant, tremblin:: and wan, either happened in our family,'*' 
from the fatigue of her walk or from a con- "Oh. heavens!" exclaimed EUena, **he 
s'oiousness of disastrous intelligence, seated is dead ! Vivaldi is dead 1 " 
herself without speaking:, and some moments "You shaU hear, signora," continued 
elapsed before she could be prevailed with to Beatrice, 
answer the repeated inquiries. "Be brief!" said EUena; "answer me 

" Oh, signora I " said she, at length, "you simply yes or no." 
do not know what it is to walk up hill such a "I cannot, tiU I come to the right place^ 
long way, at my age ! Well, heaven protect signora ; if you wUl but have a Uttle patience 
you ; I hope you never will I " you shaU hear aU. But if you fluster me so, 

"I perceive you bring ill news," said you wiU put me quite out." 
Ellcna. " I am prepared for it, and you need "Grant me patience!" said EUena. ett- 
not fear to tell me all you know." deavouring to calm her spirits. 

" Holy Saa Marco ! " exclaimed Beatrice ; "With that, signora, I asked him to walk 
" if death be ill news, you have guessed right, in and rest himself, and teU me all about iL 
signora, for I do bring news of that, it is He answered, he was in a great hurry, and 
certain. How came you, lady, to know my could not stay a moment, and a great deil of 
errand? They have been beforehand with that sort ; but I, knowing that whatever 
me, 1 see, though I have not walked so fast happened in that family, signora. was some- 
up hill this many a day. as I have now. to teU thing to you, would not let him go off so 
you what has happened." easily ; and so, when I asked hun to refresh 

She stopped on observing the changing himself with a glass of lemon-ice, he fprgot aU 
countenance of EUena, who tremulously called his business in a minute, and we had a 1od£ 
upon her to explain what had happened — who chat." 

was (lead : and en'reated her to relate the And Beatrice might now have continued 
particulars as speed! y .qs possible. her circumh-tution. pet haps, as long a* she 

"You said you were prepared, signora," had pleas^-d, for EUena had lost all power to 
said ijciirice ; "but your looks teU another urge inquiry, and was scarcely sensible of 
tale." what was said. She neither spoke, nor shed 

•' What is the evfnt you would disclose?" a tear; the one imaye th^t posses&ed her 
said ICllena, almost breathless. "When did fancy, the image of Vivaldi dead, seemed to 
it hfippen ?— be brief. " hold aU her faculties as by a spell. 

" I cannot teU exactly when it happened, "So when I asked him," added Beatrice, 

signora ; but it was an own servant of the " again what had happened, he was ready 

Alarchese that I had it from." enough to teU all about it. 'It is near a 

" TheMarchsse? " iatenupte^ Ellena, in month ago/ said he, 'since she was first 

a faUerm^ voice. Ukon ; the MatcYv«fc\v%A\««v "* 



THE ITAUAN. 



»73 



"The Kfarcheflit" repeated EUena, with 
whom that one word had diGK>lvcd the spell 
of terror— "the Ihfarcbesa 1 " 

" Yes, ajgnon, to be sure. Who else did 
I say it was ? " 

" Go on, Beatrice. The Marchesa ? — 

"What makes yoa look so glad all of a 
sudden, signora? I thought just now you 
was very sorry about it. What I I warrant you 
was thinking about my young lord, VivaldL" 

** Proceed," said EUena. 

"Wdl," added Beatrice. " it was about 
a month ago that the Marchesa was first taken, 
continixed the varlet. ' She had seemed poorly 
a long time, but it was from a conversazione 
at the di VogUo Mazzo that she came home 
so ill. It is supposed she had been in a bad 
state of health, but nobody thought her so 
near her end, till the doctors were called to- 
gether ; and then matters looked very bad 
indeed. They found out that she had been 
dying, or as good, for many years, though 
nob<Kly else had suspected it, and the Mar- 
chesa's own physician vras blamed for not 
finding it out before. But he,' added the 
rogue. ' had a regard for my lady. He was 
very obstinate too, for he kept saying, almost 
to the last, there was no danger, when every 
body else saw bow it was going. The other 
doctors soon made their words good, and my 
lady died." 

" And her son," said Ellena; " was he with 
the Marchesa when she expired ? " 

"What, Signor Vivaldi, lady? No, the 
signor was not there." 

"This is very extraordinary!" observed 
Ellena. with emotion. "Did the servant 
mention him ? " 

"Yes, signora ; he said what a sad thing it 
was that he should be out of the way at that 
time, and nobody know where ! " 

" Are his family then ignorant where lie 
is ? " asked Ellena, with increased emotion. 

' ' To be sure they are, lady, and have been 
for these many weeks. They have heard 
nothing at all of the signor, nor of one 
Paulo Mendrioo, his servant, though the 
Marchese's people have been ridipg post 
after them from one end of the kingdom to 
the other all the time." 

Shocked with the conviction of a circum- 
stance which, till lately, she scarcely believed 
was possible, the imprisonment of Vivaldi in 
the Inqui^tion, Ellena lost for a while all 
power of further inquiry ; but Beatrice pro- 
ceeded. 

" The Lady Marchesa seemed to lay some- 
thing much to heart, as the man told me, 
and often inquired for Signor Vincentio." 

" The Marchesa, you are sure then, was 
ignorant where he was ? " said Ellena, with 
new astonishment and perplexity as to the 
person who, after betraying him into the 
Inquisition, could yet have suffered her, 
though arretted nt the finme Ume, to f/icape, 



" Yes, signora, for she wanted sadly to see 
him. And when she was dying, she sent for 
her confessor, one father Schedoni, I think 
they call him, and ' 

" What of him," said Ellena, incautiously. 

" Nothing, signora, for he could not b;^ 
found." 

" Not be found ! " repeated Ellena. 

" No. signora, not just then. He was con- 
fessor, I warrant, to other people beside 
the Marchesa, and I dare say they had sins 
enough to confess ; so he could not get away 
in a hurry." 

EUena recollected herself sufficiently to ask 
no further of Schedoni ; and, when she con- 
sidered the probable cause of Vivaldi's arrest, 
she was again consoled by a hop ■ that he had 
not fallen into the power of real officials, 
since the comrades of the mtin who had 
arrested him had proved themselves otherwise, 
and she thought it highly probable that, 
while undiscovered by his family, he had 
been and was still engaged in searching for 
the place of her confinement. 

"But I was saying," proceeded Beatrice, 
"what a bustle there was when my lady the 
Marchesa was dying. As this father Sche- 
doni was not to be found, another confessor 
was sent for, and shut up with her for a long 
while indeed. And then my Lord Marchese 
was called in, and there seemed to be a deal 
going forward, for my lord was heard every 
now and then, by the attendants in the ante- 
chamber, talking loud, and sometimes my 
Lady Marchesa's voice was heard too, though 
she was so ill ! At last all was silent, and 
after some time my lord came out of the 
room, and he seemed very much flustered, 
they say, that is, very angry and yet very 
sorrowful. But the confessor remained with 
my lady for a long while after ; and, when 
he departed, my lady appeared more un- 
happy than ever. She lived all that night and 
part of the next day, and something seemed 
to lie very heavy at her heart, for she some- 
times wept, but oftener groaned, and would 
look so that it was piteous to see her. She 
frequently asked for the Marchese, and when 
he came the attendants were sent away, and 
they held long conferences by themselves. 
The confessor also was sent for again, ju5.t at 
the last, and they were all shut up together. 
After this, my lady appeared more easy in 
her mind, and not long af;er, she died." 

Ellena, who had attended closely to this 
little narrative, was prevented for the present 
from asking the few questions which it had 
suggested by the entrance of Olivia, who, on 
perceiving a stranger, was retiring, but Ellena, 
not considering these inquiries as important, 
prevailed with the nun to take a chair at the 
embroidery frame she had lately quitted. 

After conversing for a few moments with 
Olivia, she returned to a consideration of her 

own inlciesl^, T\vt ^w.tkat o\'^0cv!5^^\^ ^>;^ 



174 



TNB iTAUAN. 



appeared to her as something more ihan 
accidental ; and, though she could not ui^ 
any inquiry wiUi Beatrice concerning the 
monk of the Spirito Santo, she ventured to 
ask whether she had lately seen the stranger 
who had restored her to Altieri, for Beatrice 
knew him only in the character of Ellena's 
deliverer. 

"No, signora," replied Beatrice, rather 
sharply ; * ' I have never seen his face since 
he attended you to the villa, though, for that 
matter, I did not see much of it there ; and 
then how he contrived to let himself out of 
the house that night without my seeing him, 
I cannot divine, though I have thought of it 
often enough smce ! I am sure he need not 
have been ashamed to have shown his face 
to me, for I should only have blessed him for 
bringing you safe home again ! " 

Ellena was somewhat surprised to find that 
Beatrice had noticed a circumstance ap- 
parently so trivial, and replied that she had 
herself opened the door for her protector. 

While Beatrice spoke, Olivia, raising her 
eyes from the embroidery, had fixed them 
upon the old servant, who respectfully with- 
drew heiB ; but, when the nun was again 
engaged on her work, she resumed her o^er- 
vation. Ellena fancied she perceived some- 
thing extraordinary in this mutual examina- 
tion, although the curiosity of strangers to- 
wards each other might have accounted for 
it 

Beatrice then received directions from 
Ellena as to some drawing^ which she wished 
to have sent to the convent, and when the 
servant spoke in reply, Olivia again raised 
her eyes, and fixed them on her face with 
intense curiosity. 

"I certainly ought to know that voice," 
said the nun with great emotion, "though I 
dare not judge from your features. Is it — 
can it be possible! — is it Beatrice Olca to 
whom I speak? So many years have 
passed " 

Beatrice, with equal surprise, answered, 
" It is. signora ; you are right in my name. 
But, lady, who are you that know me ? " 

While she earnestly regarded Olivia, there 
was an expression of dismay in her look 
which increased Ellena's perplexity. The 
nun's complexion varied every instant, and 
her words failed when she attempted to speak. 
Beatrice meanwhile exclaimed, "My eyes 
deceive me I yet there is a strange likeness. 
- Santa della Heta I how it has fluttered me i 
my heart beats still — you are so like her, lady,- 
yet you are very different too. " 

Olivia, whose regards were noW entirely 
fixed upon Ellena, said, in a voice that was 
scarcely articulate, while her whole frame 
seemed sinking beneath some irresistible feel- 
ing. "Tell me, Beatrice, I conjture you 
Jitackljr say, who is this " She pointed to 
l/leiu^ aptf tiffi sentence died on her lips. 



Beatrice^ wholly oecu{iied by iliiensts ^ 
her own, gave niO reply, but exclahnedr*^ It- 
is in truth the Lady ^via I It is- herself I 
In the name of aH tiiat is sacred,^how tfattift 
you here ? Oh I how glad you most havo 
been to find one anodier out ! " Sho looked, 
still gasping Mrith astonishment, at ^OH^ 
while Ellena, unheard; repeatedly inquired 
the meaning of her words, and in the next 
moment found herself pressed to the bosom 
of the nun, who seemed better to haTetiiictor- 
stood them, and who, weeping, trembling, 
and almost fainting, held her there in silenoe;. 

Ellena, after somer moments had tlms 
passed, requested an expianadon of what 
she witnessed, and Beatrice at the same tinw 
demanded the cause of aU this emotion. 
"-For cain it be that you did not know one 
another?" she added. 

' ' What new discovery is this ? " said EUena; 
fearfully, to the nun. " "'It isbi(t lately that I 
have found my fiather ! Oh, tdl me by irlmt 
tender name I am to'call you? " = -■• 

• • Your fether 1 " cxdaimed Olivia. 

"Your father, lady 1 " echoed Beatrice. ' 

EUena, betrayed by Strong 'emotion* jnto 
this premature mention of- Schedoni, was 
embarrassed, and remained silent, 

" No, my child ! " said Olivia, softening 
from amazement into tonesT of ineffiible sofw 
row, while she again pressed Ellena to her 
hearts' ' no ! — thy father is iff thie grave ! " 

Ellena no longer returned her caresses ; 
surprise and doubt suspended every 'tender 
emotion ; she gazed upon Olivia with an in* 
tenseness that partook of wildness. At 
length she said slowly, " It is my mother then 
whom I see ! When will these discoveries 
end?" 

<*It is your mother!" replied OKvia, 
solemnly; "amother^s blessing rests wfth 
you!" 

The nun endeavoured to soothe the agi- 
tated spirits of Ellena, though she was her- 
self nearly overwhelmed by the various and 
acute feelings this disclosure occasioned** 
For a considerable time they were unable to 
speak but in short Sentences Of affectiosate 
exclamation, but joy was evideiAly a move 
predominant feeling with the P'^x'^t than 
with the chOd. When, however, EUena oocdd 
weep, she became more tranquil, and l3y do-' 
grees was sensible to a degree of happiness 
such as she had perhaps never experienced. 

Meanwhile Beatrice seemed lost in amaze- 
ment, mingled with fear. She expressed no 
pleasure, notwithstanding the joy she wit- 
nessed, but was uniformly grave and ohM 
servant. 

Olivia, when she recovered some degree of 
composure, inquired • for her sister Bianchi. 
The silence and sudden dejection of EllenA 
indicated Hht truth. ^ On this mention of it&c 
late mistress; Beatrice recovered the use Of 
speecih, 



THB ITALIAN. 



«TS 



- *'AlftSl lady/' said the old servant, "she 
l4 now where f beUef«d yoa were ; and I 
^ould as soon -have expected to see my 
dear mistnss here as yourself I " 

Olivia, though affected by this intelUgence, 
did not fed it with* the acuteness she would 
have done probaUy at . any other moment. 
After she had indul^d her tears; she added 
that, from the unnsvnl- silence of Bianchi, she 
had suspected the trtith, and particularly 
staice not any aoswer had been rt* turned to 
Che letter she had sent 'to Altieri upon her 
arrival at the Santa della Pieta. 

"Alas I " said Beatrice, " I wonder much 
my lady abbess failed to tell you the sad news, 
for she knew it too wdl I My dear mistress 
is buried in the church here ; as for the letter, 
I iMive brought it with me for Signora Ellena 
to open." 

"The lady abbess is not informed of our 
relationship,' replied Olivia, "and I have 
particular reasons for virishini; that at present 
she should remain ignorant of it. &ven you, 
my EUena, must appear only as my friend, 
tin some inquiries have l)een made which are 
essential to my peace." 

Olivia asked an explanation of EUena's late 
extraordinary assertion respecting her father, 
but this was- a request made with emotions 
very different from those which hope or joy 
Inspire. Ellena. believing that the same cir- 
cmnstanoes which had deceived herself during 
so many years as to his death had also mis- 
led Olivia, was not surprised at the incredu- 
lity hei' mother had shown, but she was con- 
Merably embarrassed how to answer her in- 
quiries. It vras now too late to observe the 
promise of secrecy extorted from her by Sche- 
doni ; the' fiist moments of surprise had be- 
trsiyed her ; vet, while she trembled further to 
tramMgress hu injunction, she pereeived that a 
ftdl explanation was now Unavoidable. And 
since ^lena considered that, as Schedoni 
ooald not have foreseen her present peculiar 
sitaation, his command had no reference to 
her mother, her scruples on this head dis- 
appeared. '■ When, therefore, Beatrice had 
withdrawn, Ellena repeated her assertion 
that her father still lived ; which, though it 
Incxeased the amazement of Olivia, didf not 
vanquish her incredulity < Olivia's tears flowed 
fiftst while, in contradiction to this assurance, 
die moitioned the year in which the Count di 
Bruno died, with some circumstances relative 
to his death, which, however, as Ellena 
understood that her mother had not witnessed 
it, she still believed had not happened. To 
<xmfirm her late assertion. Ellena then related 
a few particulars of her second interview with 
Schedoni. and, as some confirmation that he 
Uved, offered to produce the portrait which 
he had claimed as his own. Ohvia, in great 
Mftation, requested to see the miniature, and 
EHena left the apartment in search of it. 

Every moment of her absence was to 



Olivia's expectation lengthened to an hour ; 
she paced the room, listened for a footstep, 
endeavoured to tranquillise her spirits, and 
still Ellena did not return. Some strange 
mystery seemed to lurk in the narrative she 
had just heard, which she wished, yet dreaded, 
to develop ;' and when, at length, Ellena 
appeared with the miniature, she took it in 
trembling eagerness, and having gaz*^ upon 
it for an instant, her complexion faded and 
she fainted. 

Ellena had now no doubt respecting the 
truth of Schedoni's declaration, and blamed 
herself for not having more gradually pre- 
pared her mother for the knowledge of a cir- 
cumstance which she believed nad over- 
whelmed her with joy. The usual applica- 
tions, however, soon restored Olivia, who, 
when she was again alone with her daughter, 
desired to behold once more the portrait. 
Ellena, attributing the strong emotion with 
which she still regarded it to surprise, and 
fear lest she was admitting a fallacious hope, 
endeavoured to comfort her by renewed as- 
siiranccs that not only the Count di Bruno 
yet existed, but that he lived at this very time 
in Naples, and. further, that he would prot>- 
ably be in her presence within the hour. 
"When I quitted the room for the miniature," 
added Ellena, " I despatched a person with a 
note, requesting to see my father immediately, 
being impatient to realize the joy which such 
a meeting between my long-lost parents must 
occasion." 

In this instance Ellena had certainly suffered 
her generous symp>athy to overcome her dis- 
cretion, for, though the contents of the note 
to Schedoni could not positively have be- 
trayed him. had he even been in Naples at 
this time, her sending it to the Spirito Santo, 
instead of the place which he had appointed 
for his letters, might have led to a premature 
discovery respecting herself. 

While Ellena had acquainted Olivia that 
Schedoni would probably be with them soon, 
she watched eagerly for the joyful surprise she 
expected would appear on her countenance ; 
how severe, then, was her disappointment 
when only terror and dismay were expressed 
there, and when, in the next moment, her 
mother uttered exclamations of distress and 
even of despair I 

" If he sees me." said Olivia, •' I am irre- 
coverably lost I Oh, unhappy Ellena I your 
precipitancy has destroyed me. The original 
of this portrait is not the Count di Bruno, my 
dear lord, nor your parent, but his brother, 
the cruel husband " 

Olivia left the sentence unfinished, as if she 
was betraying more than was at present dis- 
creet ; but Ellena, whom astonishment had 
kept silent, now entreated that she would ex- 
plain her words and the cause of her dis- 
tress. 

••I know noC w^J^ 0\«\i\» **>cii ^^a^ 



176 



THE ITALIAN, 



means that portrait has been conveyed to you, 
but it is the resemblance of the Count Fe- 
rando di Bruno, the brother of my lord, and 

my " second husband, she should have 

faid, but her lips refused to honour him with 
the tide. 

She paused and was much affected, but 
presently added : 

' ' I cannot at present explain the subject 
more fully, for it is to me a very distressing 
one. Let me rather consider the means of 
avoiding an interview with di Bruno, and even 
of concealing, if possible, that I exist." 

Olivia was, however, soothed when she 
understood that Eilena had not named her in 
the note, but had merely desired to see the 
confessor upon a very particular occasion. 

Willie they were consulting upon the ex- 
cuse it would be necessary to form for this 
imprudent summons, the messenger returned 
with the note unopened, and with informa- 
tion that father Schedoni was abroad on a 
pilgrimage, which was the explanation the 
brothers of the Spirito Santo chose to give of 
his absence, judging it prudent, for the 
honour of their convent, to conceal his real 
situation. 

Olivia, thus released from her fears, con- 
sented to explain some points of the subject 
so interesting to Eilena ; but it was not till 
several days afrer this discovery that she could 
sufficiently command her spirits to relate the 
whole of her narrative. The first part of it 
agreed perfectly with the account deliver«3 in 
the confession to the penitentiary, Ansaldo ; 
that which follows was known only to herself, 
her sister Bianchi, a physician, and one faith- 
ful servant, who had been considerably en- 
trusted with the conduct of the plan. 

It may be recollected that Schedoni left his 
house immediately after the act which was 
designed to be fatal to the Countess his wife, 
and that she was carried senseless to her 
chamber. The wound, as appears, was not 
mortal. But the atrocity of the intent deter- 
mined her to seize the Opportunity thus 
offered by the absence of Schedoni, and her 
own peculiar circumstances, to release herself 
from his tyranny without having recourse to 
a court of justice, which would have covered 
wiih infamy the brother of her first husband. 
She withdrew, therefore, from his house for 
ever, and, with the assistance of the three 
persons before mentioned retired to a remote 
part of Italy, and S3ught refuge in the con- 
vent of San Stefanb, while at home the report 
of her death was confirmed by a public fune- 
ml. Bianchi remained for some time after 
the departure of Olivia in her own residence 
near the Villa di Bruno, having taken under 
her immediate care the daughter of the Coun- 
tess and of the first Count di Bruno, as well 
as an infant daughter of the second. 
After some time had elapsed, Bianchi with- 
dreiv with her young charge, but not to the 



neighbourhood of San Stefano. The indul- 
genoe of a mother's tenderness was denied to 
Olivia, for Bianchi could not reside near the 
convent without subjecting her to the bacaid 
of a discovery, since Schedoni, thougli he 
now beUeved the report of her deiUh, Bfiight 
be led to doubt it by the conduct of Bianoii, 
whose steps would probably be observed by 
him. She chose a residence, therefore, at a 
distance from Olivia, though not yet at 
Altieri. At this period, Eilena was not two 
years old ; the daughter of Schedoni was 
scarcely as many months, and she died before 
the year concluded. It was this his child for 
whom the confessor, who had too well con- 
cealed himself to permit bianchi to acquaint 
him with her death, had mistaken Eilena, and 
to which mistake his own portrait, affirmed 
by Eilena to be that of ber father, had con- 
tributed. This miniatture she had fotmd in 
the cabins of Bianchi after her aunt's deoease, 
and, observing it inscribed with the title of 
Count di Bnmo, she had worn it vntb a filial 
fondness ever since that period. 

Bianchi, when she had acquainted Eilena 
with the secret of her birth, was withheld, 
both by prudence and humanity, from entrust- 
ing her with a knowledge that her mother 
lived ; but this, no doubt, was the circiim^ 
stance she appeared so anxious to disclose 00 
her death-bed, when the sudd^mess of Imt 
disorder had deprived her of the power. The 
abruptness of that event had thus oontributad 
to keep the mother and daughter, unknown 
to each other, even when they afterwards 
accidentally met, to which concealment tba 
name of Rosalba, given to Eilena from her 
infancy by Bianchi, for the purpose of |mo* 
tecting her from discovery by her uncle, had 
assist^. Beatrice, who was not the domestie 
entrusted with the escape of Olivia, had be- 
lieved the report of her death, and thus, 
though she knew Eilena to be the daughter of 
the Countess di Bruno, she could never; hav« 
been a means of discovering them to each 
other, had it not happened that Olivia recog- 
nised this ancient servant of Bianchi while 
Eilena was present. 

When Bianchi came to reside in the neig)i- 
bourhood of Naples, she was unsuspidoiis 
that Schedoni, who had nevur been heard of 
since the night of the assas«nation. inhabited 
there, and she so seldom left her housf* that 
it is not surprising she should never happen 
to meet him, at least, consciously ; for her v&l, 
and the monk's cowl, might easily have con- 
cealed them from each other if they had 
met. 

It appears to have been the intention of 
Bianchi to disclose to Vivaldi the family of 
Eilena before their nuptials were filemniaed ; 
since, on the evening oif their last oonversatioqc 
she had declared, when her spirits were ex- 
hausted by the exertion she had made, that 
much retnained for ber to say, which weak- 



THE ITALIAN. 



I? 7 



oUSMdher to defer till another oppor- 
tmitx. Her m ie i ngr'l c d death prevented any 
fdtnre meeting. That she had not sooner 
intended to make a communication which 
might have removed, in a considerable degree, 
tiie objection of the Vivaldi to a connection 
with £Uena appears extraordinary, till other 
circunutanoes of her family than that of its 
nobility are oonudered. Her present indigence, 
and, yet more, the guilt attached to an in- 
dividual of the di Bnmo, it was reasonable 
to suppose would operate as a full antidote 
to the allurement of rank, however jealous of 
birth the A^valdi had proved themselves. 

Ferando di Bruno had contrived, even in 
the short interval between the death of his 
tnother and the supposed decease of his wife, 
■gain to embarrass his affaiis, and soon after 
his flight the income arising from what re- 
mained of his landed property had been 
aeiaed imon by his creditors— whether lawfully 
or ncrt, he was then in a situation which did 
nc^ permit him to contest — and Ellena was 
thus left wholly dependent upon her aunt. 
The small fortune of Bianchi had been 
diminishfid by the assistance she afforded 
Olivia, for whose admittance into the convent 
of San Stefano it had been necessary to ad- 
iranoe a considerable sum ; and her original 
income was aftervrards rwiuced by the pur^ 
chase of the Villa Altieri. This expenditure, 
however, was not an iinprudent one, since 
■he preferred the comforts and independence 
of a pleasant home with industry to the indul- 
gence of an indolence which must have con- 
fined her to an inferior residence, and was 
acquainted with the means of making this 
inonstry profitable without being dishonour- 
■Ue. She excelled in many elegant and in- 
genious arts^ and the productions of her pencil 
and needle were privately disposed of to the 
mms of La Pieta. When Ellena was of an 
■ge to assist her she resigned much of the 
empkqrment and the profit to her niece, whose 
genius having unfolded itself, the beauty ^f 
her designs and the elegance of her execution, 
both in drawings and embroidery, were so 
highly valued by the purchasers at the grate 
of the convent that Bianchi committal to 
Ellena altogether the exercise of her an. 

Olivia, meanwhile, had dedicated her life to 
devotion in the monastery of San Stefano. a 
choice which was wilUngly made while her 
mind was yet softened by grief for the death 
of her first lord, and wearied by the cruelty 
■he had afterwards experienced. The first 
yean of her retirement were passed in tran- 
quillity, except when the remembrance of her 
cuiild, whom she did not dare to see at the 
convent, awakened a parental pang. With 
Bianchi she, however, corresponded as regu- 
larly as opportunity would allow, and had at 
least the consolation of knowing that the ob- 
|ect most dear to her lived, till, within a short 
period of EUena's arrival at the very asyliun 



chosen by her mother, her apprehensions 
were in some degree excited 1^ the unusual 
silence of Bianchi. 

When Olivia had first seen Ellena in the 
chapel of San Stefano, i^he %vas struck with a 
slight resemblance she bore to the late Count 
di Bnmo, and had frequently afterwards 
examined her features with a most painful 
curiosity ; but, circumstanced as she was. 
Olivia could not reasonably suspect the stran- 
ger to be her daughter. Once, however, a 
sense of this possibility so for overcame her 
judgment as to prompt an inquiry for the 
surname of Ellena ; but the mention of 
Rosalba had checked all further conjecture. 
What would have been the feelings of the 
nun had she been told, when her generous 
compassion vras assisting a stranger to escape 
from oppression, that she was preserving her 
own child i It may be worthy of observation 
that the virtues of Olivia, exerted in a general 
cause, had thus led her unconsciously to the 
happiness of saving her daughter ; while the 
vices of Schedoni had as unconsciously urged 
him nearly to destroy his niece, and had 
always been preventing, by the means tliey 
prompted him to employ, the success of his 
constant aim. 



CHAPTER XXXr. 

n^HE Marchesa di Vivaldi, of whose death 
^ Beatrice had given an imperfect account, 
struck with remorse tor the cnmfe she had 
meditated against Ellena, and with terror of 
the punishment due to it, had sent, when on 
her death-bed. for a confessor, to whom she 
unburthened her conscience, and from whom 
she hoped to receive in return an alleviation 
of her despair. This confessor was a man 
of good sense and humanity ; and when he 
fully understood the story of Vivaldi and 
Ellena di Rosalba, he declared that her only 
hope of forgiveness, both for the crime she 
had meditated and the undeserved sufferings 
she had occasraned, rested upon her willing- 
ness to make those now happy whom she 
had formerly rendered misenible. Her con- 
science had already given her the same les- 
son ; and now that she was sinking to that 
grave which levels all distinctions, and had 
her just fear of retribution no longer opposed 
by her pride, she became as anxious to pro- 
mote the marriage of Vivaldi with Ellena as 
she had ever been to prevent it. She sent, 
therefore, for the Marchese ; and having 
made an avowal of the arts she had prac- 
tised against the peace and reputation of 
Ellena. without, however, confessing the fiill 
extent of her intended crimes, she made it 
her last request that he would consent to the 
happiness of his son. 

The Marchese, however, shocked as he 
was at this discovery of the duplicity and 
cruelty of his vj\fc» bad, t«\>}aRt\«x \sxtw ^^^ 



178 



THE ITALIAN, 



the future, nor remorse for the past, to over- 
come his objection to the rank of EUena ; 
and he resisted all her importunity till the 
anguish of her last hours vanquished every 
consideration but that of affording her relief. 
He then gave a solemn promise, in the pre- 
sence of the confessor, that he would no 
longer oppose the marriage of Vivaldi and 
EUena, should the former persist in his at- 
tachment to her. 1 his promise was sufficient 
for the Marchesa, and she died with some 
degree of resignation. It did not, however, 
appear probable, that the Marchese would 
soon be called upon to fulfil the engagements 
into which he had so willingly enter^, every 
inquiry after Vivaldi having been hitherto 
ineffectual. 

During the progress of this fruitless search 
for his son, and while the Marchese was 
almost lamenting him as dead, the inhabit- 
ants of the Viv^di palace were one night 
aroused from sleep by a violent knocking at 
the great gate of the court. The noise was 
so loud and incessant that, before the porler 
could obey the summons, the Marchese, 
whose apartment looked upon the court, 
was alarmed, and he sent an attendant 
from his ante-room to inquire the occasion 
of it. 

Presently a voice was heard from the first 
ante-chamber, exclaiming, "I must see my 
Lord Marchese directly ; he will not be 
anery to be waked, when he knows all about 
it,' and before the Marchese could order 
that no person, on whatever pretence, should 
be admitted, Paulo, haggard, ragged, and 
covered with dirt, was in the chamber. His 
wan and affrighted countenance, his dis- 
ordered drc?s, and his very attitude, as on 
entering he half turned to look back upon 
the ante-rooms, like one who, just escaped 
from bondage, listens to the fancied sounds 
of pursuit, were altogether so striking and 
terrific that the Marchese, anticipating some 
dreadful news of Vivaldi, had scarcely power 
to inquire for him. Paulo, however, rendered 
questions unnecessary, for without any cir- 
cumlocution or preface he immediately in- 
formed the Marchese that the signor, his 
dear master, was in the prisons of the In- 
quisition at Rome, if, indeed, they had not 
put an end to him before that time. 

"Yes, my lord," said Paulo, *' I am just 
got out myself, for they would not let me tie 
with the signor, so it was of no use to stay 
there any longer. Yet it was a hard matter 
with me to go away and leave my dear master 
within those dismal walls ; and nothing should 
have persuaded me to do so, but that I hoped, 
when yoiu* lordship knew where the signor 
was, you might l)e able to get him out. But 
there is not a minute to be lost, my lord, for 
when once a gentleman has got within the 
daws of those inquisitors, there is no know- 
iDff bow soon theymsLy fake ii in their heads 



to tear him ia pieces. Shall I bider 

for Rome, my lord? I am readj to set off 

again directly." 

The suddenness of such inteUigenoe, con- 
cerning an only son, might have agkatied 
stronger nerves than those jf the MarblMse, 
and so much was he shodud by it that he 
could not immediately determine hoiw to pro* 
ceed, or give any answer to Paulo's repeated 
questions. When, however, he became suffi- 
ciently recollected to make further inquiry into 
the situation of Vivaldi, he perceived the 
necessity of an immediate journey ;' but first 
it would be prudent to consult with some 
friends, whose connections at Rome might be 
a means of greatly facilitating the important 
purpose whidi led him thither, and tha coold 
not be done till the following morning. Yet 
he gave orders that preparation should be 
made for his setting out at a moment's notice ; 
and, having listen^ to as full an account as 
Paulo could give of the past and present 
circumstances of ^valdi, be dismissal him 
to repose for the remainder of the night. 

Paulo, however, though much in want of 
rest, was in too great an agitation of S|ririts 
either to seek or to find it : and the fear he 
had indicated, on entering the Marchese's 
apartment, proceeded from the hurry of his 
mind rather than from any positive appre- 
hension of new evil. For his liberty he was 
indebted to the young senti^ who had on 
a former occasion been removed firom the door 
of his prison, but who, t)y means of the guard 
to whom Vivaldi had given money as he re- 
turned one night from the tribmia], had since 
been able to communicate with him. This 
man, of a nature too humane fior his situation, 
was become wretched in it, amd he determined 
to escape from his office before the ezfdiation 
of the time for which he had been engaged. 
He thought that to be a guard over pruaners 
was nearly as miserable as being a prisoner 
himself. *' I see no difference tietween them," 
said he, ' ' except that the prisoner watches on 
one side of the door, and the sentinel on the 
other." 

With the resolution to release himsdf^ he 
conferred with Paulo, whose good nature and 
feeling heart, among so mauT people of a 
contrary character, had won his confidence 
and affection, and he laid his plan of escape 
so well that it was on the point of succeeding; 
when Patdo's obstinamr in attempting an 
impassibility had neaiiy counietsueted the 
whole. It went to his heart, he said, to leave 
his master in prison while he. himself was to 
march off in safety, and he would run the risk 
of his neck rather than have sndi a. deed 
upon his head. He proposed, therefore, as 
Vivaldi's guards were of 'too fidnoGions a 
nature to be tampered with, to scale "a wall 
of the court into which a grate of Vivaldi's 
dungeon looked. But had this lofty, wall 
been ptacticable, the grate wat not ; and tfap 



THB ITAUAN. 



179 



attempt had - nearly cost Paulo not only his 
liberty but hia li£e. 

When, at length, he had made his way 
through the pa:uons avenues of the prison, 
and was iiEurly beyond the walls, he could 
hardly be prevailed upon by bis companion 
to leave them. For near an hour, he wan- 
dered under their shade, weeping and ex- 
claiming, and calling upon his dear master, 
at the evident haxard of being retaken ; and 
probably would have remained there much 
longer, had not the dawn of morning ren- 
deied his companion desperate. Just, how- 
ever, as the man was forcing him away, 
Paulo ianded he distinguished, by the 
strengthening light, the roof of that par- 
ticular building in whose dimgeon his 
master was confined, and the appearance of 
Vivaldi himself could scarcely have occa- 
sioned a more sudden burst of joy ; succeeded 
by one of grief. " It is the roof, it is the very 
roof 1" exclaimed Paulo, vaulting from the 
ground and clapping his hands ; "it is the 
roof, the roof 1 Oh, my master, my master 1 
the roof, the roof I " He continued alternately 
to exdaim, "My master! the roof! my 
master I the roof 1 " till his companion began 
to fear he was frantic, while tears streamed 
down his cheeks, and every look and gesture 
expressed the most extravagant and whim- 
sical union of joy and sorrow. At length the 
absolute terror of discovery compelled his 
companion to force him from the spot; when, 
having lost sight of the building which en- 
closed Vivaldi, he set off for Naples with 
a speed that defied all interruption, and ar- 
rived there in the condition which has been 
mentioned, having taken no sleep, and 
scarcely any sustenance, since he left the 
Inquisition. Yet, though in this exhausted 
state, the spirit of his anection remained un- 
broken; and when, on the following morning, 
the Marchese quitted Naples, neither his 
weariness, nor the imminent dainger to which 
this journey must expose him, could prevent 
his attending him to Rome. 

The rank of the Marchese and the in- 
fluence he was known to possess at the court 
of Naples were circumstances that promised 
to- have weight with the Holy OfUce, and to 
procure Vivaldi a speedy rdease ; but yet 
more than these were the high connections 
which the Count di Maro, the friend of the 
Marchese, had in the Church of Rome. 

The applications, however, which were 
made to Uie inquisitors were not so soon 
replied to as the wishes of the Marchese had 
expected, and he had been above a fortnight 
in that city before he was even permitted to 
visit his son. In this interview affection pre- 
dominated on- both sides over all remem- 
brance of the past. The condition of Vi- 
valdi, hb faded appearance, to which the 
wounds he had received at Celano, and from 
which he wa« scarcely recorered, had con- 



tributed, and his situation in a mefamcholf 
and terrible prison, were drcomstances that 
awakened all the tenderness of the father ', 
bis errors were forgiven, and the March^ 
felt disposed to consent to all that might 
restore him to happiness, could he but t)e 
restored to libetty. 

Vivaldi, when informed of his mother's 
death, shed bitter tears of sorrow and re- 
morse for having occasioned her so mncfa 
uneasiness. The unreasonableness of her 
claims was forgotten, and her faults were 
extenuated ; happily, indeed, for his peace, 
the extent of her criminal designs he had 
never understood ; and when he Teamed that 
her dying request had been intended to pro- 
mote his h£^)piness, the cruel conscious- 
ness of having inlerrupted her's occasioned 
biro severe anguish, and he was obligni to 
recollect her former conduct towards EUena 
at San Stefano before he could become recon* 
ciled to himself. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

NEAR three weeks had elapsed since the 
Marchese's arrival at Rome, and not 
any decisive answer was returned by the In- 
quisition to his application, when he and Vi- 
valdi received at the same time a summons to 
attend father Schedoni in his dungeon. To 
meet the man who had occasioned so much 
suffering to his family was extremely pamful 
to the Marchese, but he was not allowed to 
refuse the interview ; and at the hour ap- 
po'nted he called at the chamber of Vivaldi, 
and, followed by two officials, they passed on 
together to that of Schedoni. 

While they waited at the door of the prison- 
room till the numerous bars and locks were 
unfastened, the agitation which Vivaldi had 
suffered on receiving the summons returned 
with redoubled force, now that he was about 
to behold, once more, that wretched man who 
had announced himself to be the parent of 
Ellena di Rosalba. The Marchese suflered 
emotions of a different nature, and with his 
reluctance to see Schedoni was mingled a de- 
gree of curiosity as to the event which had 
occasioned this summons. 

The door being thrown open the officials 
entered first, and the Marchese and Vivaldi, 
on following, discovered the confessor lying 
on a mattress. He did not rise to receive 
them ; but, as he lifted his head and bowed 
it in obeisance, his countenance, upon which 
the httle light admitted through the tiiple 
grate of his dungeon gleamed, seemed more 
than usually ghastly ; his eyes were hollow, 
and his shrunk features appeared as if death 
had already touched them. Vivaldi, on per- 
ceiving him, groaned and averted his face ; 
but, soon recovering a command of himself, 
he approached the mattress. 



( 



x8a THE ITALIAN. 

» * 

curedi the torch of erne of the sentinels who ing \k% relationship to EUena, be daimed, in 
watched in the dark avenue without was considBration of the aflection he had so long 
brought in its stead, and this discovered to cherished for her/ a full explanation of the 
Scbedoni the vai:i9its figures assembled in his circumstances connected with the discovwy Of 
■dusky chambia:, and to them the emaciated her family. 

form and ghastly visage of the confessor. At this public avowal of his attachment, 
As Viv-Udi now beheld him by the stronger a haughty-impatienceappearodonthecounte- 
light of the torch, Jbe again feincied that nance of the Marthese, who forbade him to 
d»th was ia his aspect. • make further inc^uiry on the subject and was 

Every person was now ready for the decla- immediatdy retinng from the chamber, 
ration of Schedoni ; but .he himself seemed " My piaaence is no longer necessary," he 
not fiiUy prepared. . He remained for some added; "the prisoner has concluded the 
momooits redining on iiis pillow in silence, only detail' which I could be interested to hear 
with his eyes shut,, while the changes in his from him ; and, in consideiation of the con- 
features indicated the ^strong emotion of his fession he has made as to the innocence of 
mind. Then, as if by a violent effort, he mv son, I pardon him the sufiering which his 
half raised himself and made an ample fsuse charge has occasioned to me and my 
confession of the arts he had practised against femily. The paper containing his deposidons 
Vivaldi. He declared himself to be the is given to ymu: responsibility, holy father,*' 
anonymous accuser who had caused him to addressing the inquisitor ; " and vou are 
be arrested by the Holy Office, and that the required to lay it upon the table of the Hdv 
charge of heresy which he had brought Omce, that the innocence of Vincentlo u 
against him was false and malicious. Vivaldi may appear, and that he may be 

At the moment when Vivaldi received released from these prisons without further 
this confirmation of his accuser, he discovered delay. But, first, I demand a copy of those 
more fully that the charge was not what had declarations, and that the copy also shall be 
been stated to him at the chapel of San signed by the present witnesses." 
Sebastian, in which EUena was implicated ; The secretarywas now bidden to copy them, 
and he. demanded an explanation of this dr- and, while the Marchese waited to receive ihe 
cumstance. Schedoni acknowledged that paper (for he would not leave the chamber 
the persons who had there arrested him till he had seciuied it), Vivaldi was wging his 
were not officers of the Inquisition; and that claim for an explanation respecting the fiunily 
the instrument of arrest, containing the of Ellena, with unconquerable perseverance. 
charge of elopement with a nun was forged Schedoni, no longer permitted to evade the 
by himself for the purpose of empowering inquiry, could not, however, give acircum- 
the ruffians to carry off EUena without oppo- stantial explanation without (Kutly disdosing 
sition from the inhabitants of the convent, in also the fatal designs which had been medi- 
which she was then lodged. tated by him and the late Marchesa di Vivaldi, 

To Vivaldi's inquiry, why it had been of whose death he was ignorant ; he related, 
thought necessary to employ stratagem in the therefore, little more respecting EUena than 
removal of EUena, since, if Schedoni had that a portrait, which she wore as being her 
only claimed her for his daughter, he might father's, had first led to the discovery of her 
have removed her without any. the confessor family. 

replied, that he was then ignorant of the While the confiessor had been giving this 
relationship which existed between them, brief explanation, -Nicola, who was somewhat 
But to the further inquiries, with what design, withdrawn from the circle, stood gazing at 
and whither EUena had been removed, and him with the malignity of a demon. His 
the means by which be had discovered her to glowing eyes just appeared beneath the edge 
be his daughter, Schedoni was silent ; and of his cowl, while, rolled up in his dark 
he sank back, overwhelmed by the recoUeo- drapery, the lower features of his face were 
tions they awakened. muffled ; but the intermediate part of his 

The depositions of Schedoni, having been countenance, receiving the fiiU glare of the 
taken down by the secretary, were formally torch, displayed all its speaking and terrific 
signed by the inquisitor and the officials pre- lines. Vivaldi, as his eye glan^ upon him, 
sent : and Vivaldi thus saw his innocence saw again the very monk of Paluzziv and fie 
vindicated by the very man who had thrown thought he beheld also a man capable of the 
h m among the perils of the Inquisition. Biit very crimes of which he had accused Sche- 
t e near prospect of release now before him doni. At this instant, he remembered the 
failed to affect him with joy, whUe he under- dreadful garment that had been discovered 
stood that EUena was the daughter of Sche- in a dungeon of the fortress ; and, yet nuve, 
doni, the child of a murderer, whom he him- he remembered the extraordinary drdim- 
sdf had been in some d^[ree instrumental in stances attending the death of Biaodii, to- 
taingiag to a dreadfiil and ignominious gether with the immediate knowledge whidi 
death. Still, however, wilUng to hope that the monk bflA dis^\&Y«d of that event. Vi- 
Scbedoai had aot ipoken the truth Qonceru- vaMii'tj soi^ctoia leB^ctidnti ^tan q«bi^ t^ 



THB ITAUAN. Z83 

her <leath being thus revived, he determined Schedoni more intently, that he mis:ht be 

to obtain, if ponible, either a relief from, or certain it uraa he who had spoken. .The 

a confirmatioa of them ; and he solemnly confessor's eyes were fixed upon him. and he 

called .oixni Schedoni, who, already con- repeated slowly in the same tone, "Have you 

demned to die, had no longer anything to forgotten ? " 

fear from a disclosure of the truth, whatever "I have not foigotten the conversation to 

it might be, to declare all that he knew on which you alhide, replied Vivaldi, "and I 

the sidiject. As he did so, he looked at do not recollect that I then disclosed any 

Nicola, to observe the effect of this demand, opinion that may justify your assertion." 
whose cotmtenance was now, however, so "The opinions you avowed were rational," 

much shrouded, that little of its expression said Schedoni, " but the ardour of your im- 

oould be seen; and Vivaldi remarked that, agination was apparent; and what ardent 

while he had spoken, the monk drew his imagination ever was contented to trust to 

garment closer over the lower part of his face, plain reasoning, or to .the., evidence of the 

and that he had immediately turned his eyes senses ? It may not willingly confine it&elf to 

from him upon the confessor. the dull truths of this earth, but, eager to ex- 

With most solenm protestations, Schedoni pand its faculties, to fill its capacity, and to 

declared himself to be both innocent and experience its own peculiar delights, soars 

ignorant of the cause of Bianchi's death. after new wonders into a world of its own I " 

Vivaldi then demanded by what means his Vivaldi blushed at this reproof, now con- 
agent, Nicola, had obtained such immediate scions of its justness ; and was surprised that 
iiSormation, as the warning he had delivered Schedoni should so well have understood the 
at Pttluxzi proved him to have, of an event nature of his mind, while he himself, with 
in whidi it appeared that he coidd be little whom conjecture bad never assumed the 
interested ; and why that warning had been stability of opiniou on the subject to which 
given. the confessor alluded, had been ignorant even 

Nioola did not attempt to anticipate the of its propensities, 
reply of Schedoni, who, after a momentary "I acknowledge the truthof your remark," 

sQenoe, said "That warning, yonng man, said Vivaldi, "as fiu* as it concerns myself. 

was given to deter you from visitinj^ Altieri, I have, however, inquiries to make on a point 

as was every circumstance of advice or in- less abstracted, and towards explaining which 

telligence wnich you received beneath the the evidence of my senses themselves have 

arch of P&luzzi." * done little.- To whom belonged the bloody 

"Fathei^," replied Vivaldi, "jrou -have garments I found in the dungeon of Paluzzi, 

never loved, or you would have spared your- and what became of the person to whom they 

8df the practice of artifices so ineffectual to had pertained?" 

mislead or to conquer a lover. Did you be- Consternation appeared for an instant on 

Uevethat an anonymous adviser could have the features of Schedoni. "What garments?" 

more influence with' me than my affection, or said he. 

that I could be terrified by such stratagems "They appeared to be those of a person 

into the renunciation of its object ? \ who had died by violence," replied Vivaldi, 

"I believed, "rejoined the confessor, "that "and they , were . discovered in a place 

the disinterestiBd advice of a stranger might frequented by your avowed agent, Nicola, 

have some weight with you; but I trusted the.motik." 

more to the impression of awe which the As be concluded the sentence, Vivaldi 

conduct and seeming foreknowledge of that looked at Nicola, upon whom the attention 

stranger were adapted to inspire in a mind of every person present was now directed. 
Ifte yours, and I thus endeavoured to avail " They were my own," said this monk. 
mjw&i of your prevailing weakness." "Your own I and in that condition 1 " ex- 

"And what do you term my prevailing claimed Vivaldi. "They were covered with 

weakness ? " said Vivaldi, blushing. gore 1 " 

"A susceptibility which renders you "They were my own," repeated Nicola, 

especially liable to siq>erstition," replied " For their condition I. have to thank you — 

i^edonl. the wound your pistol gave me occasioned 

"What! does a monk call superstition a it." 

weakness?" rejoined Vivaldi. "But grant : Vivaldi was astonished at this apparent 

he does, on what occasion have I betrayed subterfuge. "I had no pistol,".he r^oined, 

silch weakness ? " ' "my sword was my only weapon. " - 

" Have you forgotten a conversation which . " Pause a moment," said the monk. 
I once held with you on invisible spirits? " " I repeat that I had no firearms," replied 

said Schedoni. Vivaldi 

As he asked this, Vivaldi was struck with " I appeal to father Schedoni," rejoined 

the tones of his voice.; he thought it was Nicola, '.'whether I. was not wounded by a 

cUfferent from what he had remembered ever pistol shot." 
to have h^rd irom him, and be looked at VTo me^ouYkSCVQ itf^ '\sy^^ssc %cci xs^^ ^^ 



«84 



THE ITALIAN. 



appeal," said Schedoni. " Why should I save 
you from suspicions that may bring you to a 
state like this to which you have reduced 
me I" 

"Your crimes have reduced you to it," 
replied Nicola, **I have only done my duty, 
and that which another person could have 
effected without my aid— the priest to whom 
Spalatro made his last confession." 

'*It is, however, a duty of such a Icind," 
observed Vivaldi, "as I would not willingly 
have upon my conscience. You have betrayed 
the life of your former friend, and have com- 
pelled me to assist in the destruction of a 
fellow-being." 

* ' You, like me, have assisted to destroy a 
destroyer," replied the monk. "He has 
taken life, and deserves, therefore, to lose it 
If, however, it will afford you consolation to 
know that you have not materially assisted 
in his destruction, I will hereafter give you 
proof for this assurance. There were other 
means of showing that Schedoni was the 
Count di Bruno than the testimony of Au- 
saldo, though I was ignorant of them when I 
bade you summon the penitentiary." 

*' If you had sooner avowed this," said Vi- 
valdi,' *' the assertion would have been more 
plausible. Now I can only understand that 
it is designed to win my silence, and prevent 
my retordng upon you your own maxim — 
that he who has taken the life of another, 
deserves to lose his own. — ^To whom did those 
garments belong ? " 

" To myself, I repeat," replied Nicola, 
" Schedoni can bear testimony that I received 
at Paluzzi a pistol wound." 

"Impossible," said Vivaldi, " I was armed 
only with my sword ! " 

"You had a companion," observed the 
monk ; " had not he firearms? " 

Vivaldi, after a momentary consideration, 
recollected that Paulo had pistols, and that 
he had fired one beneath the arch of Paluzzi, 
on the first alarm occasioned by the stranger's 
voice. He immediately acknowledged the re- 
collection. " But I heard no groan, no 
symptom of distress I " he added. " Brides, 
the garments were at a considerable distance 
from die spot where the pistol was fired 1 
How could a person, so severely wounded as 
those garments indicated, have silently wiA- 
drawn to a remote dungeon, or having done 
so, is it probable he would have thrown aside 
his dress I " 

" All that is nevertheless true," replied 
Nicola. ** My resolution enabled me to stifle 
the expression of my anguish ; I withdrew to 
the interior of the ruin to escape from you, 
but you pursued me even to the dungeon 
where I threw off my discoloured vestments, 
in which I dared not return to my convent, 
Asd dqxurted by a way which all your ingenuity 
^cd to discover. The people who were 
MJreadym the fort, for the purpose of assisting 



to confine you and your servant duHng th6 
night on which Signora Rosalba was taken 
from Allien, procuxed me another habit and 
relief for my wound. But, though I was 
unseen by you during the night 1 was not 
entirely unheard for my groans reached you 
more than once from an adjoining chamber, 
and my companions were entertained with 
the alann which your servant testified. — Are 
you now convinced ? " 

The groans were clearly remembered by 
Vicraldi ; and many other circumstances of 
Nicola's narration accorded so well with 
others which he recollected to have occiured 
on the night alluded to, that he had no longer 
a doubt of its veiadty. The suddenness of 
Bianchi's death, however, still occasioned him 
suspicions as to its cause ; yet Schedoni had 
declared not only that he was innocent but 
ignorant of its cause, which, it appeared 
from his unwillingness to give testimony in 
favour of his agent, he would not have 
affirmed had he been conscious that the 
monk was in any degree guilty in this instance. 
That Nicola could have no inducement for 
attempting the life of Biandii other than a 
reward offered him by Schedoni, was clear ; 
and Vivaldi, after more fully ootisidering these 
circumstances, became confinced that her 
death was in consequence of acme incident 
of natural decay. 

While this conversatk>ii was paasing, the 
Marchese, impatient to put a oonduaioa to it, 
and to leave the chamtier, repeatedly urged 
the secretary to despatch ; and whUe he now 
earnestly renewed his request, another voice 
answered for the secretary, that he had nearly 
concluded. Vivaldi thought that he had 
heard the voice on some former occasion, 
and on turning his eyes upon the person who 
had spoken, discovered the stranger to be 
the same who had first visited him in 
prison. Perceiving by his drtss that he was 
an officer of the Inquisition, Vivaldi now 
understood too well the purport of his former 
visit, and that he had come with a design to 
betray him by affected sympathy into a con- 
fession of some heretical opini(ms. Similar 
instances of treachery Vivaldi had heard 
were frequently practised upon accused ]>er- 
sons, but he had never fully believed such 
cruelty possible till now that it had been 
attempted towards himself. 

The visit of this person bringing to bis 
recollection the subsequent one he had re- 
ceived from Nicola, Vivaldi inquired whether 
the sentinels had really admitted him to bis 
cell, or he had entered it by other means ; a 
question to which the monk was alent, but 
the smile on his features, if so strange en 
expression deserved to be called a smile, 
seemed to reply, "Do you believe that I, a 
servant of the Inquisition, wiU betray its 
secrets?" 

VWa\d\,\iO«c««i, wis^ the Inquiry, for he 



THB ITAUAN. 



tS5 



wished to know whether the guard, who 
appeared to be fidthfal to their office, had 
escaped the punishment that was threatened. 

"They were honest," replied Nicola, 
"seek no further." 

" Are the tribunal convinced of their in- 
tegrity?'* 

Nicola smiled again in derision, and re- 
plied. "They never doubted it/* 

" How I " sflud Vivaldi. " Why were these 
men put under arrest, if their faithfulness 
was not even suspected ? " 

" Be satisfied with the knowledge which 
'experience has given you of the secrets of 
the Inquisition, replied Nicola, solemnly ; 
" seek to know no more 1 " 

"It has terrible secrets!" said Schedoni, 
who had been long silent. " Know, young 
man, that almost every cell of every prisoner 
has a concealed entrance, by which the 
ministers of death may pass unnoticed to 
their victims. This Nicola is now one of 
those dreadful summoners, and is acquainted 
with an the secret avenues that lead to 
murder*** 

Vivaldi shrunk from Nicola in horror, 
and Sdbedoni paused ; but while he had 
spoken. Vivaldi had again noticed the extra^ 
ordinary change in his voice, and shuddered 
at its sound no less than at the information it 
had given. Nicola was silent ; but his ter- 
rible eyes were fixed in vengeance on Sche- 

" His office has been short," resumed the 
confessor, turning his heavy eyes upon Nicola 
" and his tadc is almost done 1 " As he prq- 
notmc^ the last words his voice faltered, 
but they were heard by the monk, who, draw- 
ing nearer to the bed, demanded an expla- 
nation 0^ them. A ghastly smile triimiphed 
in the features of Schedoni. " Fear not but 
that an exidanation will come full soon," 
said he. 

Nicola fixed himself before the confessor, 
and bent his brows upon him as if he would 
have searched into his very soul. When 
"^nvaldi again looked at Schedoni he was 
shocked on observing the sudden alteration 
of his coimtenance, yet still a faint smile of 
triumph lingered there. But while Vivaldi 
gazed, the features suddenly became agitated; 
In the next instant his whole frame was con- 
vulsed, and heavy groans laboured from his 
breast. Schedoni was now evidently dying. 

The horror of Vivaldi and of the Marchese, 
who endeavoured to leave the chamber, was 
(squalled only by the general confusion that 
reigned there *, every person present seemed 
to feel, at least, a momentary compassion, 
except Nicola, who stood unmoved beside 
Schedoni and looked steadfastly upon his 
pangs, while a smile of derision marked his 
countenance. As Vivaldi observed with de- 
testation this expression, a slight spasm darted 
over Nicola's fac^ and his muscles also 



seemed to labotur with sudden conCractk» ; 
but the affection was transient, and vanished 
as abrupdy as it had appeared. The moflii# 
however, turned from the miserable specUide 
before him, and as he turned he caught in- 
voluntarily at the arm of a person near him, 
and leaned on his shoulder for support. His 
manner appeared to betray that he had not 
been permitted to trium|^ in the sufferings of 
his enemy without participating at least in 
their horror. 

Schedoni's struggles now began to abater 
and in a short time he lay motionless. When 
be unclosed his eyes, death was in them. He 
was still nearly insensible, but presently a 
daunt gleam of recollection shot from them, 
and gradually lighting them up, the character 
of his soul appeared there ; the expression 
was indeed feeble, but it was true. He moved 
his lips as if he would have spoken, and 
looked languidly round the chamber, seemingly 
in search of some person. At length be 
uttered a sound, but he had not yet stmSdent 
command of his muscles to modulate that 
sound into a word, till, by repeated efforts^ 
the name of Nicola became intelligible. At 
the call, the monk raised his head from the 
shoulder of the person on whom he had re- 
clined, and, turning round. Schedoni, as was 
evident from the sudden change of expresskm 
in his cotmtenance, discovered him ; his eyes, 
as they settled on Nicola, seemed to re-coUect 
all their wonted fire, and the malignant tri- 
umph, lately so prevalent in his physiognomy, 
again appeared as in the next moment he 
pointed to him. His glance seemed sud- 
denly impowered with the destructive fascina- 
tion attributed to that of the basilisk, for while 
it now met Nicola's, that monk seemed as if 
transfixed to the spot, and imable to with- 
draw his eyes from the glare of Schedoni's ; 
in their expiiession he read the dreadful 
sentence of his fate, the triumph of revenge 
and cunning. Struck with this terrible con- 
viction a pallid hue overspread his face, at 
the same time an involuntary motion con- 
vulsed his features, cold trembling seized upon 
his frame, and, uttering a deep groan, he fell 
back, and was caught in the arms of the 
people near him. At the instant of his fall. 
Schedoni uttered a sound so strange and 
horrible, so convulsed and so loud, so exulting, 
yet so unlike any human voice, that every 
person in the chamber, except those who 
were assisting Nicola, struck with irresistible 
terror, endeavoured to make their way out of 
it. This, however, was impracticable, for the 
door was fastened until a physician, who had 
been sent for, should arrive, and some in- 
vestigation could be made into this mysterious 
affair. The consternation of the Marchese 
and of Vivaldi, compelled to witness this 
scene of horror, cannot easily be imagined. 

Schedoni, bavizig uttered that demoniacal 
sound of ei»V\a\iQiTit \<«& tlqX ^^rcocMt.^ vn 






z86 THE ITALIAN. 

rq>eat It, for the pangs he bad lately suffered is improbable that yon should have had an 
retum«l upon lum, and he was again in opportunity of providing yourself with poison 
strongconvulsions when the physician entered alter your arrest, and equally improbable 
the chamber. The moment he beheld Schedoni that you should have thought such provision 
he declared him to l>e poisoned, and he pro- necessary before that penod. Confess who^ 
nounced a similar opinion on fkther Nioola, is your accomplice." 

affirming also that the drug, as appeared This accusation of falsehood recalled the 
from the violence of the efl^, was of too spirit of Schedoni, which contending with 
subtle and inveterate a nature to allow of and conquering, for a moment, corporeal 
antidote. lie was, however, willing to ad- sufferingi hesaKl in a firmer tone, "It was 
minister the medicine usual in such cases. the poison ^i which I dip my poniard, the 

While he was giving orders to an attendant better to defend me." 
with respect to this, the violence of Schedoni's The inquisitor smiled in contempt, of tljib 
convulsions once more relaxed ; but Nicola explanation, and Schedoni, observing him, 
appeared in the last extremity. HissufiGerings desired a particular part of his vest might be 
were incessant, his senses never for a moment examined, where would be found some 
returned, and he expired before the medicine remains of the drug concealed, as he had 
which had been sent for could be brought, affirmed. He was indulged in his requesL 
When it came, however, it was administered and the poison was discovered mthin a broad 
with some success to Schedoni, who recovered hem of his garment. 

not only his recollection, but his voice : and Still it was inconceivable how he had con* 
the fint word he uttered was, as formerly, the trived to administer it to Nicola, who, though 
name <^ Nicola. he had been for some time alone with him on 

*< Does he live ? " added the confessor, with this day, would scarcely have so far confided, 
the utmost difficulty, and after a long pause, in an enemy as to have accepted any seeming 
The persons around him were silent, but the sustenance that might have been offered by 
truth which this silence indicated seemed to him. The inquisitor, stiU anxious to discover 
revive him. an accomplice, asked Schedoni who bad 

The inquisitor who had attended, per- assisted to administer the drug to Nicola ; 
ceiving that Schedoni had recovered the use but the confessor was no longer in a con- 
of his intdlects, now judged it prudent to ask dition to reply. Life was now sinking apace ; 
some questions relative to his present con- the gleam of spirit and of character that had 
dition. and to the cause of Nicola's death. returned to his eyes was departed, and left 

" Poison," replied Schedoni. readily. them haggard and fixed; and presently a 

*' By whom administered ?." said, the in- livid corpse was all that remained of the once 
quisitor ; " consider that, while you answer, terrible Schedoni 1 
you are on your death-bed." While this awful event had been acoomp- 

"I have no wish to conceal tlie truth," lishing, the Marchese, suffering undjor. the 
rejoined Schedoni, ''nor the satisfaction," — utmost perturbation, had wiUidrawn to the 
he was obliged to pause, but presently added, distant grate of the dungeon, where he con- 
"I have destroyed him who woiUd have versed with an official as to what might be 
destroyed me, and — and I have escaped an the probable consequence of his present situo- 
ignominious death." tion to himself ; but Vivaldi, in an agony of 

He paused again ; it was with difficulty that horror, had been calling incessantly Tor the 
he had said thus much, and he was now over- medicine, which might possibly afford some 
come by the exertions he had made. The rdief to the anguish he witnessed ; and when 
secretary, who had not been permitted to it was brought, he had assisted to support the 
leave the chamber, was ordered to note Sche- sufferers, 
doni's words. At length, now that the worst was over, and 

* ' You avow, then, ''continued the inquisitor, when the several witnesses had signed to the 
" that the poison was administered, both in last avowal of Sch^oni, every person in .the 
the case of father Nicola and inyom: own, by chamber was suffered to depart ; and VTvaldi 
yourself ? •' was re-conducted to his- prison,, accompanied 

Schedoni could not immediately reply ; by the Marchese, where ne was to rem'aia tiQ 
but when he did. he said, "I avow it." the decision of the Holy Office respecting his 

He was asked by what means he had con- innocence, as asserted by the deposition of 
trived to procure the poison, and was bidden Schedonii should be known. He was too 
to nnme bis accomplice. much .affected by the late scene to give the 

" I had no accomplice," replied Schedoni. Marchese any explanation at present respect- 

" How did you procure the poison, then? " ing the family of EUena di Rosalba ; and the 

Schedoni, slowly and with difficulty, replied, Marphese, having remained for some time 
*' It was concealed in my vest." with his son, withdrew to the residence of his 

••Consider that yoii are dying," said the friend. 
Jnguisitor, '* and confess the truth. - We can- . ■■ 

jrc?^ beUeve what you bwc Uat assolod. \% .... 



Tub iTAUA^. • S87 

Marchese; "you perceiv^^that joy haa ren- 
dered him dduioua I " 

CHAPTER XXXIII. •• How 1 wandered about the walb half the 

IN oonseqaenoe of the dying coafeasion of night, and what it cost me to leave them I 

ScfaedonI, atl order was sent from the But when I lost sight of them, signor, oh, 

"A^ Office fdr the release of Vivaldi within San Dominico I I thought my heart would 

A few dAys after the death of the confessor, have broke. I had a great mind to liavf» 

aiid the Marchese conducted his son from the gone baok again and given iryselt up ; p;ad,' 

prisons of the Inquisition to the mansion of perhaps, I should too, if it had not b^n for 

his friend, the Count di Maro. with whom he my friend, the sentinel, who eicp/ped with 

had r^ded since his arrival at Rome. me, and I would not do him an Injury, poor 

While they were receiving the ceremonious fellow I for he meant nothing but kindness 

congratulations of the Count, and of some when he let me out. And. sure enough, 

nobles assembUd to welcome the emancipate as it proved, it was all for the best ; for 

prisoper, a loud .yoice w^ heard from the now I am here, too, sjgnor, as well as you, 

ante-chamber, exclaiming, "Let me pass I and can tell you all I felt when I believed I 

It 18 my master ; let me pass 1 May all those should never see you again. " 

who attempt to stop mo be sent to the In- The contrast of his present joy to his re- 

qcddtion thiemselves i " membered grief again brought tears into- 

In the next iostant Paulo burst into the Paulo's eyes; he smiled and wept and sobbed 

saloon, followed by a group of lacqueys, who, and laughed with such rapid transition that 

however, paused at Uie door, fearful of the Vivaldi began to be alarmed for him ; when» 

displeasure of their lord, yet scarcely able to suddenly becoming calm, he looked up in his 

stme a laugh ; while Paulo, springing for- master's face, and said gravely, but with 

ward, had nearly overset some of the com- eagerness, " Pray, signor, was not the roof of 

pany, who happened at that moment to be your little prison p^ed, and was there not 

bowing with profound joy to Vivaldi. a little turret stuck up at one comer of it ? 

" It is my master t it is my dear master 1 " and was there not a battlement round the 

ciled Paulo; and, sen^ipg off a nobleman turret? and was there not " Vivaldi, 

with each elbow, as he made his way between after regarding him for a moment, replied 

them, he hugged Vivaldi in his arms, repeat- smilingly, "Wby, truly, my good Paulo, my 

ing, "Oh, my master I my master 1 " till a dungeon was so far from the roof that I never- 

passion of joy and nfTection overcame his had an opportunity of observing it." 

voice, and he fell at his master's feet and wept. "That is very true, signor." replied Paulo. 

This was a moment of finer satisfaction to "very true indeed ; but I did not happen to* 
Vivaldi than he had known since bis meeting think of that. I am certain, though, it was. 
with his father ; and he was too much in- as I say, and I was sure of it at the time. Oh,, 
terested by bis faithful servant to have leisure signor 1 I thought that roof would have- 
to apologize, to the astonished company for broke my heart. Ob, how I did look at it t: 
his rudeness. While the lacqueys were re- and now to think that I am here, with my 
pairing the mischief Paulo had occasioned, dear master once again ! " 
were, picking tip the rolling snuff-boxes he As Paulo concluded, his tears and sobs re- 
had jerked a,wav in his .passage, and wiping turned with more violence than before ; and 
the snuff from the soiled clothes, Vivaldi was X'ivaldi, who could not perceive any necessary 
participating in all the delight and. returning connection between this mention of the roof 
an the affection of his servant, and was so of his late prison and the joy his servant: 
wholly occupiea by these pleasurable feelings expressed on seeing him again, began to>fbar- 
as scarcely to be sensible that any persons that his senses were bewildered, and desired 
besides themselves were in the room. The an explanation of his words. Paulo's account;. 
Marchese, meanwhile, was making a thou- rude and simple as it was, soon discovered' to< 
sand apologies for the disasters Paulo had him the relation of these apparently heteror 
occasioned ; was sdtemately calling upon -him geneous circumstances to each other ; when: 
to recollect in whose presence he was, and to Vivaldi, overcome by this new instance of the- 
quit the apartment immediately, explaining power of Paulo's affection, embraced himj 
to the company that he had not seen Vivaldi with his whole heart, and, compelling him to. 
since they were. together in the Inquisition, rise, presented him to the assembly as hia 
and remarking profoundly that he was much faithful friend and chief deliverer. 
attadied to his master. But Paulo, insensible The Marchese, affected by the scene he had 
to the repeated commands of jhe Marchese, witnessed, and with the truth of Vivaldi's 
and to the endeavours of ViValdi to raise him, words, condescended to give Paulo a hearty 
was still pouring forth his whole heart at his shake by the hand, and to thank him warmly 
master's feet. "Ah 1 my signor/' said he, for the bravery and fidelity he had displayed 
" if you could but know how miserable I was in his master's interest. " I never can fully 
when I got out of the Inquisition " reward your attachment, " added the Marchese, 

" He raves 1" observed the Count to the "but what remains for mfi lo Cj;^ ^&a^\» 



190 '; THBITALIAH. 

'J 

. revels, and, mmoanded bv a pttty pt his 

CHAPTER XXXIV. . own particular assodates, aanoed oocelmoxe, 

THE fete which, some time flto the as he had so oAen wished, upon the moon- 
nuptials, was g\ven by the Marcbese in light shore of Naples. 
celebration of them was held at a delightful -As Vivaldi and Ellena were passing the 
▼ma belonging to Viraldi, a few miles distant spot which Paulo bad chosen for the scene of 
from Naples, upon the border of the gulf, his festivity, they paused to observe his strange 
and on the opposite shore to that which had capers and extravagant gesdoulations as he 
beoi the frequent abode of the Marchesa. mmgled in the daoce, while ever^ noW and 
Ttie beauty o( its situation and its interior then he shouted forth, though half bieatbless 
cAegance induced Vivaldi and Ellena to select with the heartiness of the exercise, " O^ 
it as ibeir chief residence. It was, in truth, giornofelice I OA, giomofelice / " 
a scene of fair3riand. The pleasure grounds On perceiving Vivaldi, and the sraHes with 
extended over a valley which opened to the which he and Ellena regarded him, he quitted 
bay, and the house stood at the entrance of his sports, and advancing, "Ah I my dear 
this valley, upon a gentle slope that margined master," said he, "do you remember the 
tlie water, and commanded the whole extent night when we were traveling on the banks 
of its luxuriant shores, from the lofty cape of of the Celano, before that diabolical accident 
lifiseno to the bold mountains of the south, happened in the chapel of San Sebastian ? 
wbidi, stretching .across the distance, ap- don t you remember how those people, who 
paired to rise out of the sea, and divided the were tripping it away so joyously by inoon- 
gulf of Naples from that of Salerno. light, reminded me of Naples and the many 

The marble porticoes and arcades of the merry dances I had footed on the beacn 

tflU were shadowed by groves of the beauti- here ? " 

fol magnolia, flowering ash, cedrati, camellias, " I remember it well," replied Vivaldi, 

and majestic palms ; and the cool and airy "Ah! signor mto^ you said at the time 

halls, opening on two opposite sides to a that you hoped we should soon be here, and 

colonnade, admitted beyond the rich foliage that then I should frisk it away with as glad 

an the seas and shores of Naples from the a heart as the best of them. ITie first part of 

west ; and to the east, views of the valley of ]rour hope, my dear master, you were out in, 

the domain, withdrawing among winding for, as it happened, we had to go through 

hills wooded to their summits, except where purgatcnry before we could reach paradise ; 

cliffs of various- coloured granites, yellow, but the second part is come at last, iat here 

green, and purple, lifted their tall heads, and I am, sure enough ! dancing by moonlight 

threw gay gleams of light amidst the um- in my own dear bay of Naples, with my 

ibrageous landscape. own dear master and mistress, in s^ety, and 

'Die style of the gardens, where lawns and as happy almost as myself, and with that old 

fl»>ves and woods varied the undulating sur- mountain yonder, Vesuvius, which I, forsooth, 

me. was that of England, and of the present thought I was never to see again, spouting up 

^^:t rather than of Italy, except " where a fire, just as it used to do before we got our- 

loag drfiey peeping on the main " exhibited selves put into the Inquisition I Oh I who 

such £*igantic lofiiness of shade, and grandeur oouid have foreseen all this I Oht giornojtlice 1 

of perspective as characterize the Italian Oh, j^orno/elicel" 

taste. " I rejoice in your happiness, |ny good 

On this 3iA>ilee, everv avenue and grove and Paulo," said Vivaldi, ' ' almost as much as in 

pavilion was richly illuminated. The villa my own ; though I do not entirely agree with 

Itself, where «ach airy hall and arcade was you as to the comparative proportion of 

■esplendent with lights, and lavishly decorated each. ' ' 

with Aownrs and the most beautiful shrubs, " Paulo," said Ellena, "I am indebted to 

whose buds seemed to pour all Arabia's per- you beyond any ability to repay ; for to your 

fumes on the air — this villa resembled a fabric intrepid affection your master owes his pre- 

<CEdled ttp by enchantment, ratherjthan astruc- sent safety. I will not attempt to thank you 

tase of human art. for your attachment to him ; my care of your 

The dresses of the higher rank of visitors welfare shall prove how well I know it ; but 

were as splendid as the scenery, of which I wish to give to all your friends this ac- 

EUena was, in every respect, the queen. But knowledgment of your worth, and of my sense 

tlds entertainment was not given to persons of it." 

ftf disttflctjon only, for both Vivaldi and Paulo bowed, and stammered, and writhed 

EUena had wished that all the tenanu of the and blushed, and was unable to reply ; till at 

dooiajn should partake of it, and share the length, giving a sudden and lofty spring from 

abomdant happiness which themselves pos- the ground, the emotion which had nearly 

' sessed; so that the grounds, which were ex- stifled him, burst forth in words, and " Oh, 

tensive enough to accommodate each rank, giomo feliul Oh, giomo felicel" flew 

fF(en?iie?inguisbed to a general gaiety. Paulo from his lips wiih the force cf an electric 

%yas, aa ibis occasion, a sort of master of the shock. Th^ communicated his enthusiasm 



• ^ THE ITALIAN. igt 

to the whole oomiMUiy ; Aewordg passed like And may ran. if we will, straight forward, 

lightning from one individual to another, from one end of the earth to the other, and 

tm Vivaldi and Ellena withdrew amidst a back again without being stopped I May fly 

choral shout, and all the woods and strands in the sea, or swim in the sky, or tumble over 

of Na^es re-echoed with, " Oh, giomo head and heels into the moon 1 For remem- 

felicif Oh, giomo felicel" ber, my good friends, we have no l«ul in our 

" You see^" said Paulo, when they had consciences to keep us down I " 

departed, and he caine to himself again. " You mean swim in the sea and fly in the 

" you see how people get through their mis- sky, I suppose," observed a grave personage 

fortunes, if they have but a heart to bear up near him ; " but as for tumbling over head 

against them, and do nothing that can he on and heels into the moon, I don't know what 

Uieir conscience afterwards ; and how sud- you mean bv that ! " 

denly one comes to be happy, just, perhaps, " Pshaw 1 " replied Paulo, "who can stop 

when one is beginning to think one never at such a time as this to think about what he 

is to be happy again 1 Who would have means ! I wish that all those who on this 

guessed that my dear master and I. when we night are not merry enough to speak before 

were clapped up in that diabolical place, the they think may ever after be grave enough to 

Inquisition, should ever come out ajgain into think before they speak i But you, none of 

this world 1 Who would have gues^. when you. no, not one of you, I warrant, ever saw the 

we were taken before those old devils of in- roof of a prison when your master happened 

quisitocs, sitting there all of a row in a place to be below in the dungeon, nor know what 

under ground, hung with black, and nothing it is to be forced to run away and leave him 

but twdies all around, and faces grin- behind to die by himself I Poor souls i But 

ning at us that looked as black as the no matter for that — ^you can be tolerably 

gently aforesaid, and when I was not so happy, perhaps, notwithstanding ; but as for 

modi as suffered to open my mouth— no 1 guessing how happy I am. or knowing any- 

they would not let me open my mouth thing about the matter- Oh ! it's quite 

to my master 1 — who, I say, would have beyond what you can understand. Oh, giomo 

guessed we should ever be let loose again ! ftlice 1 Oh, giomo ftlice i " repeated Paulo, 

Who would have thought we should ever as he boundMl forward to mingle in the dance, 
know irhat it is to be happy ! Yet here we and " Oh, giomo /elicei" was again shouted 

are an abroad once more 1 All at liberty 1 in chorus by his joyful companions. 






•/v 



THB END. 



J, OGDEN AND CO., PRINTBRS, IJh ST. JOHN STRBBT, B«G> 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



THE 



ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



INTERSPERSED WITH 



SOME PIECES OF POETRY 



BY 



ANN RADCLIFFE 



AUTHOR OF "the ITALIAN," "THE MYSTERIES OF CDOLFHO 



LONDON AND NEW YORK 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS 

1877 



CAPTAIN MARRYAT'S NOVELS. 

PETER SIMPLE. 

MR. MIDSHIPMAN EASV. 

THE PACHA OF MANV TALES. 

jACOti PAitaFUL. 

MOOSIElTR VIOLET 

THE KING'S OWN 

BATTLIN THE REEFER. 

PKRCIVAL KEENE. 

THE PHANTOM SHIP. 

NEWTON FORSTt'.R: 

THE DOG FIEND. 

■PRANIC MILDJLW. 

THE JOACHEB. 

JAPHET IN SEARCH OF A FATHER. 

VALERIE. 

OLLA PODRIDA. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



CHAPTER I. 

I am a man, 
So weary with disasters, tugg'd with fortune, 
That I would set m^ life on a chance. 
To mend it, or be nd on't. 

Shakspkarb. 

•• When once sordid interest seizes on the 
heart, it freezes up the source of every warm 
and liberal feeling ; it is an enemy alike to 
virtue and to taste — this it perverts and that 
it annihilates. The time may come, my 
friend, when death shall dissolve the sinews of 
Ayarice, and Justice be permitted to resiune 
her rights." 

Such were the words of the Advocate 
Nemours to Pierre de la Motte, as the latter 
stepped at midnight into the carriage which 
was to bear him far from Paris, from his 
creditors, and the persecution of the laws. 
Dc la Motte thanked him for this last instance 
of his kindness, the assistance he had given 
him in escape, and, when the carriage drove 
away, uttered a sad adieu. The gloom of the 
hour, and the peculiar emergency of his cir- 
cumstances, sunk him in silent reverie. 

Whoever has read Guyot de Pitaval, the 
most faithiul of those writers who record the 
proceedings in the Parliamentary Courts of 
F^ris during the seventeenth century, must 
surely remember the striking story of Pierre 
'de la Motte, and the Marquis Philippe de 
Montalt : let all such, therefore, be informed 
that the person here introduced to their 
notice was that individual Pierre de la Motte. 

As Madame de la Motte leaned from the 
coach window, and gave a last look to the 
walls of Paris — Paris, the scene of her former 
happiness, and the residence of many dear 
friends — tlie fortitude which had till now sup- 
ported her yielded to the force of grief. 
" Farewell all ! " sighed she, "this last look 
— and we are separated for ever I " Tears 



followed her words, and, sinking back, she 
resigned herself to the stilbess of sorrow. 
The recollection of former times pressed 
heavilv upon her heart : a few months before 
and sue was surrounded by friends, fortune, 
and consequence ; now she was deprived of 
all, a miserable exile from her native place, 
without home, without comfort— almost with- 
out hope. It was not the least g€ her afflictions 
that she had been obliged to quit Paris with- 
out bidding adieu to her only son, who was 
now on duty with his regiment in Germany ; 
and such had been the precipitancy of tnis 
removal, that had she even known where he 
was stationed, she had no time to inform 
him of it, or of the alteration in his father's 
circumstances. 

Pierre de la Motte was a gentleman de- 
scended from an ancient house of France. 
He was a man whose passions often over- 
came his reason, and, for a time, silenced his 
conscience ; but though the image of rirtue, 
which Nature had impressed upon his heart, 
was sometimes obscured by the passing in- 
fluence of vice, it was never wholly obliterated. 
With strength of mind sufficient to have with- 
stood temptation, he would have been a good 
man ; as it was, he was always a weak,* and 
sometimes a vicious member of society: yet 
his mind was active, and his imagination vivid, 
which, co-operating with the force of passion, 
often dazzled his judgment and subdued 
principle. Thus he was a man infirm in 
purpose and visionary in virtue ; in a word, 
his conduct was suggested by feeling, rather 
than principle ; and his virtue, such as it was, 
could not stand the pressure of occasion. 

Early in life he had married Constance 
Valentia, a beautiful and elegant woman, 
attached to her family and beloved by them. 
Her birth was equal, her fortune superior, to 
his ; and their nuptials had been celebrated 
under the auspices of an approving and flatter- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



\n% world. Her heart was devoted to La 
Motte, and,*for some time she found in him 
an afTectionate husband ; but, allured by the 
gaieties of Paris, he was soon devoted to its 
luxuries, and in a few years his fortune and 
adffection were equally lost in dissipation. A 
false pride had still operated against his in- 
terest, and withheld him from honourable 
retreat while it was yet in his power ; the 
habits which he had acquired, enchained him 
to the scene of his former pleasure ; and thus 
he had continued an expensive style of life 
till the means of prolonging it were exhausted. 
He at length awoke from this lethargy of 
security ; but it was only to plunge into new 
error, and to attempt schemes for the repara- 
tion of his fortune which served to sink him 
deeper in destruction. The consequence of a 
transaction in which he thus engaged now 
drove him, with the small wreck of his pro- 
perty, into dangerous and ignominious exile. 

It was his design to pass into one of the 
southern provinces, and there seek, near the 
borders of the kingdom, an asylum in some 
obscure village. His family consisted of his 
wife and two faithful domestics, a man and 
woman who followed the fortunes of their 
master. 

The^nigbt was dark and tempestuous, and, 
at about the distance of three leagues from 
Paris, Peter, who now acted as postillion, 
having drove for some time over a wild 
heath where many ways crossed, stopped, and 
acquainted De la Motte with his perplexity. 
The sudden stopping of the carriage roused 
the latter from his revefie, and filled the whole 
party with the terror of pursuit ; he was un- 
able to supply the necessary direction, and 
the extreme darkness made it dangerous to 
proceed without one. During this period of 
distress, a light was perceived at some dis- 
tance, and after much doubt and hesitation. 
La Motte, in the hope of obtaining assistance, 
alighted and advanced towards it ; he pro- 
ceeded slowly from the fear of unknown pits. 
The light issued from the window of a small 
and ancient house, which stood alone on the 
heath, at the distance of half a mile. 

Having reached the door, he stopped for 
some moments, listening in apprehensive 
anxiety ; no sound was heard but that of the 
wind, which swept in hollow gusts over the 
waste. At length he ventured to knock, and, 
having waited some time, during which he in- 
distinctly heard several voices in conversation, 
someone within inquired what he wanted? La 
Motte answered that he was a traveller who 
had lost his way, and desired to be directed to 
the nearest town. " That," said the person, 
"is seven miles off, and the road bad enough, 
even if you could see it ; if you only want a 
bed, vou may have it here, and had better 
stay.'*^ 
TTie '^pitiless pelting*' of the storm, which 
a( this time beat with increasing fury upon 



La Motte, inclined him to give up the attempt 
of proceeding farther till daylight ; but, de- 
sirous of seeing the person with whom he con- 
versed before he ventured to expose his family 
by calling up the carriage, he asked to be 
admitted. The door was now opened by a 
tall figure with a light, who invited La Motte 
to enter. He followed the man through a 
passage into a room almost unfurnished, in 
one comer of which a bed was spread upon 
the floor. The forlorn and desolate aspect of 
his apartment made La Motte shrink involun- 
tarily, and he was turning to go out when the 
man suddenly pushed him back, and he heard 
the door locked upon him ; his heart failed, 
yet he made a desperate though vain effort 
to force the door, and called loudly for release. 
No answer was returned, but he distinguished 
the voices of men in the room above, and not 
doubting but their intention was to rob and 
murder him, his agitation at first nearly over- 
came his reason. By the light of sonae almost 
expiring embers he perceived a winciow, but 
the hope which this discovery revived was 
quickly lost, when he found the aperture 
guarded by strong iron bars. Such prepara- 
tion of security surprised him, and confirmed 
his worst apprehensions. Alone, unarmed, 
beyond the chance of assistance, he saw him- 
self in the power of people whose trade was 
apparently rapine — ^murder their means ! After 
revolving every possibility of escape, he en- 
deavoured to await the event with fortitude ; 
but La Motte could boast of no such virtue. 

The voices had ceased, and all remained 
still for a quarter of an hour, when, between 
the pauses of the wind, he thought he dis- 
tinguished the sobs and moaning of a female ; 
he listened attentively and became confirmed 
in his conjecture ; it was too evidently the 
accent of distress. At this conviction the 
remains of his courage forsook him, and a 
terrible surmise darted with the rapidity of 
lightning across his brain. It was probable 
that his carriage had been discovered by the 
people of the house, who, with a design of 
plunder, had secured his servant, and brought 
hither Madame de la Motte. He was the 
more inclined to believe this by the stillness 
which had for some time reigned in the house 
previous to the sounds he now heard. Or 
it was possible that the inhabitants were not 
robbers, but persons to whom he had been 
betrayed by his friend or servant, and who 
were appointed to deliver him into the hands 
of justice. Yet he hardly dared to doubt 
the integrity of his friend, who had been 
entrusted with the secret of his flight and the 
plan of his route, and had procured him tlie 
carriage in which he had escaped. "Such 
depravity," exclaimed La Motte, " cannot 
surely exist in human nature ; much less in 
the heart of Nemours ! " 

This ejaculation was interrupted by a noise 
in the passage leading to the room ; it ap- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 7 

proached — the docMr was unlocked — and the ccalcd, he exclaimed aloud that a horse was 
man who had admitted La Motte into the unnecessary, that he Iiad a carriaj^^e at some 
house, entered, leading, or rather forcibly drag- distance wnich would convey them from the 
ging along, a beautiful girl, who appeared to heath, and declared the man who was seized 
be about eighteen. Her features were bathed to be his servant. 

in tears, and she seemed to suffer the utmost The ruffian, speaking through the door, 
distress. The man fastened the lock and put bid him be patient awhile, and he should hear 
the key in his pocket. He then advanced to more from him. I^ Motte now turned his eyes 
La Motte, who had before observed other upon his unfortunate companion, who, pale 
persons in the passage, and pointing a pistol to and exhausted, leaned for support against the 
his breast, "You are wholly in our power," wall. Her features, which were delicately 
said he, "no assistance can reach you; if beautiful, had gained from distress an exprcs- 
you wish to save yoiu* life, swear that you will sion of captivating sweetness : she had 
convey this girl where I may never see her . 

more ; or ra^er consent to take her with you, ^ ^^.^ ^^^ blue sky trem^l4s thro' a cloud 
for your oath I would not believe, and I can of purest white, 
take care you shall not find me again. Answer 

quickly, you have no time to lose." A habit of gray camlet, with short slashed 

He now seized the trembling hand of the sleeves, showed, but did not adorn, her figure ; 
£^1, who shrunk aghast with terror, and it was thrown open at the bosom, upon which 
hurried her towards La Motte, whom surprise part of her hair had fallen in disorder, while 
still kept .silent. She sunk at his feet, and, with the light veil hastily thrown on, had, in her 
supplicating eyes that streamed with tears, confusion, been suffered to fall back. Every 
implored him to have pity on her. Notwith- moment of further observation heightened the 
standing his present agitation, he found it ini- surprise of La Motte, and interested him more 
possible to contemplate the beauty and dis- warmly in her favour. Such elegance and 
tress of the object before him with indifference, apparent refinement, contrasted with the dcso- 
Her youth, ^er apparent innocence, the artless lation of the house, and the savage manners 
energy of her manner, forcibly assailed his of its inhabitants, seemedto him like a romance 
heart, and he was going to speak, when the of imagination rather than an occurrence of 
ruffian, who mistook the silence of astonish- real life. He endeavoured to comfort her, 
nient for that of hesitation, prevented him. and his sense of compassion was too sincere to 
"I have a horse ready to take you from be misunderstood. Her terror gradually sub- 
hence," said he, "and I will direct you over sided into gratitude and grief. "Ah, sir I" 
the heath. If you return within an hour, you said she, " Heaven has sent you to my relief, 
die ; after then, you are at liberty to come and will surely reward you for your protection ; 
here when you please." I have no friend in the world if I do not find 

La Motte, without answering, raised the one in you." 
lovely girl from the floor, and was so much La Motte assured her of his kindness, when 
relieved from his own apprehensions that he he was interrupted by the entrance of the 
had leisure to attempt dissipating hers. "Let ruffian. He desired to be conducted to his 
us be gone," said the ruffian, "and have no family. "All in good time, "replied the latter; 
more of this nonsense ; you may think your- " I have taken care of one of them, and will 
self well off it's no worse. I'll go and get the of you, please St. Peter ; so be comforted." 
horse ready." These comfortable words renewed the terror 

The last words roused La Motte and per- of La Motte, who now earnestly begged to 
plexed him with new fears ; he dreaded to know if his family were safe. "Oh I as for 
mention his carriage, lest it might tempt the that matter they are safe enough, and you 
banditti to plunder ; and to depart on horse- will be with them presently ; but don't stand 
back with this man might produce a conse- farlying here all night. Do you choose to go 
quence yet more to be dreaded. Madame or stay? you know the conditions?" They 
la Motte, wearied with apprehension, would now bound the eyes of La Motte and of the 
probably send for her husband to the house, young lady, whom terror had hitherto kept 
when all the former danger would be incurred, silent, and then placed them on two horses, a 
with the additional evil of being separated man mounted behind each, and they im- 
frora his family, and the chance of being de- mediately galloped off. They had proceeded 
tected by the emissaries of justice in endeavoiu-- in this way near half an hour, when La 
ing to recover them. As these reflections Motte entreated to know whither he was 
passed over his mind in tumultuous rapidity, going ; " You will know that by-and-by," said 
a noise was again heard in the passage, an the ruffian, "so be at peace." Finding inter- 
uproar and scuffle ensued, and in the same rogatories useless, La Motte resumed silence 
moment he could distinguish the voice of his till the horse stopped. His conductor then 
servant, who had been sent by Madame La hallooed, and being answered by voices at 
Motte in search of him. Being now deter- some distance, in a few moments the sound of 
mined to disclose what could not long be con- carriage wheels vjasVv^StT^ axvdL,?ftQw^Vy5t»^^ 



8 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



words'of a man directing Peter which way to 
drive. As the carriage approached, La Motte 
called, and to his inexpressible joy was 
answered by his wife. 

•' You are now beyond the borders of the 
heath, and may go which way you will," said 
the ruffian ; "if you return within an hour 
you will be welcomed by a brace of bullets." 
This was a very imnecessary caution to La 
Motte, whom they now released. The young 
stranger sighed deeply, as she entered the 
carriage; and the rufl&ans, having bestowed 
upon Peter some directions and more threats, 
waited to see him drive oflF. They did not 
wait long. 

La Motte immediately gave a short relation 
of what had passed at the house, including an 
account of tiie manner in which the young 
stranger had been introduced to him. During 
this narrative, her deep convulsive sighs fre- 
quently drew the attention of Madame La 
Motte, whose compassion became gradually 
interested in her behalf, and who now en- 
deavoured to tranquillise her spirits. The un- 
happy girl answered her kindness in artless 
and simple expressions, and then relapsed 
into tears and silence. Madame forebore for 
the present to ask any questions that might 
lead to a discovery of her connections, or seem 
to require an explanation of the late adventure, 
which now furnishing her with a fiew subject 
of reflection, the sense of her own misfortunes 
pressed less heavily upon her mind. The 
distress even of La Motte was for awhile 
suspended ; he ruminated on the late scene, 
and it appeared like a vision, or one of those 
extravagant fictions that sometimes are ex- 
hibited in romance ; he could reduce it to 
no principle of probability, or render it com- 
prehensible by any endeavour to analyse it. 
'I'hc present charge, and the chance of future 
trouble brought upon him by this adventure, 
occasioned some dissatisfaction ; but the 
beauty and seeming innocence of Adeline, 
united with the pleadings of humanity in her 
favour, and he determined to protect her. 

The tumult of emotions which had passed 
in the bosom of Adeline, began now to sub- 
side ; terror Was softened into anxiety, and 
despair into grief. The sympathy so evident 
in the manners of her companions, particularly 
in those of Madame La Motte, soothed her 
heart, and encouraged her to hope for better 
days. 

Dismally and silently the night passed on ; 
for the minds of the travellers were too much 
occupied by their several sufferings to admit 
of conversation. The dawn, so anxiously 
watched for, at length appeared, and intro- 
duced the strangers more fully to each other. 
Adeline derived comfort from the look of 
Madame La Motte, who gazed frequently and 
attentively at her, and thought she had 
seldom seen a countenance so interesting, or a 
form so striking. The lajaguor of sorrow 



threw a melancholy grace upon her features 
that appealed immediately to the heart ; and 
there was a penetrating sweetness in her blue 
eyes, which indicated an intelligent and 
amiable mind. 

La Motte now looked anxiously from the 
coach window, that he might judge of his 
situation, and observe whether be was fol- 
lowed. The obscurity of the davm confined 
his views, but no person appeared. The sua 
at length tinted the eastern clouds and the- 
tops of the highest hills, and soon after burst 
in full splendour on the scene. The terror 
of La Motte began to subside, and the grief 
of Adeline to soften. They entered upon a 
lane confined by high banks, and overarched 
by trees on whose brandies appeared the fii^t 
green buds of spring glittering with dews. 
The fresh breeze of the mommg animated 
the spirits of Adeline, whose mind was deli- 
cately sensible to the beauties of nature, and 
as she viewed the flowery luxuriance of the 
tUrf, and the tender green of the trees, or 
caught, between the opening banks, a glimpse 
of the varied landscape, rioi with wood, and 
fading away in blue and distant mountains, 
her heart expanded in momentary joy. With 
Adeline the charms of external nature were 
heightened by those of novelty ; she had 
sddom seen the grandeur of an extensive 
prospect, or the magnificence of a wide 
horizon — and not often the picturesque 
beauties of more confined scenery. Her 
mind had not lost, by long oppression, that 
elastic energy which resists calamity ; else, 
however susceptible might have been her 
original taste, the beauties of nature would 
no longer have charmed her thus easily even 
to temporary repose. 

The road at length wound down the 
side of a hill, and L^ Motte, again looking' 
anxiously from the window, saw before him 
an open champaign country, through which 
the road, wholly unsheltered from observa- 
tion, extended almost in a direct line. The 
danger of these circumstances alarmed him, 
for his flight might without difficulty be 
traced for many leagues from the hills he was 
now descending. Of the first peasant that 
passed he inquired for a road among theliiUs^ 
but heard of none. La Motte now sunk into 
his former terrors. Madame, notwithstand- 
ing her o>vn apprehensions, endeavoured to 
reassure him, but finding her efforts ineffec- 
tual, she also retired to the contemplation of 
her misfortunes. Often, as they went on, did 
La Motte look back upon the country they 
had passed, and often did imagination suggest 
to him the soimds of distant pursuit. 

The travellers stopped to breakfast in a; 
village where the road was at length obscured * 
by woods, and La Motte's spirits again re- 
vived. Adeline appeared more tranquil than 
she had yet been, and La Motte now asked for 
an explanation of the scene he had witnessed 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



on the preceding night. The inquiry renewed 
all her distress, and with tears she entreated 
for the jx'esent to be spared on tlie subject. 
La Motte prised it no further, but he ob- 
served that for the greater part of the day she 
seemed to remember it in melancholy and de- 
jection. They now travelled among the hills, 
and were, therefore, in less danger of observa- 
tion ; but La Motte avoided the great towns, 
and stopped in obscure ones no longer than 
to refresh the horses. About two hours after 
noon the road wound into a deep valley, 
watered by a rivulet, and overhung with 
wood. He now called to Peter, and ordered 
him to drive to a thickly-embowered spot that 
appeared on the left. Here he alighted with 
his family, and Peter having spread the pro- 
visions on the turf, they seated themselves and 
partook of a repast which, in other circum- 
stances, would have been thought delicious. 
Adeline endeavoured to smile, but the languor 
of grief was now heightened by indisposition. 
The violent agitation of mind and fatigue of 
body which she had suffered for the last 
twenty-four hours, had overpowered her 
strength, and, when La Motte led her 
back to the carriage her whole frame trembled 
with illness ; but she uttered no complaint, 
and, having long observed the dejection of 
her companions, she made a feeble effort to 
enliven them. 

They continued to travel during the day 
without any accident or interruption, and 
sdx>ut three hours after sunset arrived at 
Monville, a small town, where La Motte de- 
termined to pass the night. Repose was, 
indeed, necessary to the whole party, whose 
pale and haggard looks, as they alighted from 
the carriage, were but too obvious to pass 
unobserved by the people of the inn'. As 
soon as beds could be prepared, Adeline 
withdrew to her chamber, accompanied by 
Madame La Motte, whose concern for the 
fair stranger made her exert every efifort to 
soothe and console her. Adeline wept in 
silence, and taking the hand of Madame, 
pressed it to her bosom, i. These were not 
merely tears of grief — they were mingled with 
those which flow from the grateful heart 
when, unexpectedly, it meets with sympathy. 
Madame La Motte understood them. After 
some momentary silence, she renewed her 
assurances of kindness, and entreated Adeline 
to confide in her friendship ; but she carefully 
avoided any mention of the subject which had 
before so much affected her. Adeline at 
length found words to express her sense of 
this goodness, which she did in a manner so 
natur^ and sincere, that Madame, finding 
herself much affected, took leave of her for 
the night. 

In the morning La Motte rose at an early 
hour, impatient to be gone. Everything 
was prepared for his departure, and the 
breakfast had been waiting some time, but 



Adeline did not appear. Madame I^ Motte 
went to her chanil^er, and found her sunk in 
a disturbed slumber. Her breathing wiis 
short and irreguhu:— she frequently started 
or sighed, and sometimes she muttered an 
incoherent sentence. While Madame gazed 
with concern upon her languid countenance, 
she awoke, and, looking up, gave her hand to 
Madame La Motte, who found it burning 
with fever. She had passed a restless night, 
and, as she now attempted to rise, her head, 
which beat with intense pain, became gidtly, 
her strength failed, and she simk back. 

Madame was much alarmed, being at once 
convinced that it was impossible she cc^uld 
travel, and tliat a delay might prove fatal to 
her husband. She went to inform him of the 
truth, and his distress may be more easily 
imagined than described. He saw all the 
inconvenience and danger of deUiv, yet he 
could not so far divest himself of humanity 
as to abandon Adeline to the care, or rather 
to the neglect, of strangers. I le sent imme- 
diately for a physician, wiio pronounced her 
to be in a high fever, and said a removal in 
her present state must be fatal. La Motte 
now determined to wait the event, and en- 
deavoured to calm the transports of terror 
which, at times, assailed him. In the mean- 
wliile, he took such precautions as his situ- 
ation admitted of, passing the greater part of 
the day out of the village, in a spot from 
whence he had a view of the road for some 
distance ; yet to be exposed to destruction by 
the illness of a girl, whom he did not know, 
and who had actually been forced upon him, 
was a misfortune to which La Motte had 
not pliilosophy enough to submit with com- 
posure. 

Adeline's fever continued to increase during 
the whole day, and at night, when the 
physician took his leave, he told La Motte 
the event would very soon be decided. La 
Motte received this hint of her danger wth 
real concern. The. beauty and innocence of 
Adeline had overcome the disadvantageous 
circumstances under which she had been in- 
troduced to him, and he now gave less con- 
sideration to the inconvenience she might 
hereafter occasion him than to the hope of 
her recovery. 

Madame I^a Motte watched over her with 
tender anxiety and observed, with admi- 
ration her patient sweetness and mild 
resignation. Adeline amply repaid her, . 
though she thought she could not. " Young 
as I am," she would say, " and deserted by 
those upon whom I have a claini for pro-' 
tection, I can remember no connection to 
make me regret life so much as that I hope 
to form with you. If I live, my conduct will 
best express my sense of your goodness — 
words are but feeble testimonies." 

The sweetness of her manners so muclv 
attracted Madame l^a ^\o\.\^ N^-aX ^^ 



lo THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 

watched the crisis of her disorder with a to travel, without seeing a hut or meeting a 
solicitude which precluded every other in- human being. It was now near sunset, and 
terest. Adeline passed a very disturbed night, the prospect being closed on all sides by the 
and when the physician appeared in the forest, La Motte began to have apprehensions 
morning he gave orders that she should be that his servant had mistaken the way. The 
indulged with whatever she liked, and an- road, if a road it could be called, which 
swered the inquiries of La Motte with a afforded only a slight track upon the grass, 
frankness that left him nothing to hope. was sometimes overrun by luxuriant vege- 

In the meantime his patient, after drinking tation, and sometimes obscured by the deep 
profusely of some mild liquids, fell asleep, shades, and Peter at length stopped, un- 
in which she continued for several hours, and certain of the way. La Motte, who dreaded 
so profound was her repose, that her breath being benighted in a scene so wild and solitary 
alone gave sign of existence. She awoke free as this forest, and whose apprehension of 
from fever, and with no other complaint than banditti were very sanguine, ordered him to 
weakness, which in a few days she overcame proceed at any rate, and, if he found no 
so well as to be able to set out with La Motte track, to endeavour to gain a more open part 

for B , a village out of the great road, of the forest. With these orders, Peter again 

which he thought it prudent to^uit. There set forwards ; but having proceeded some 
they passed the following night, and early way, and his view being still confined by 
the next morning commenced their journey woody glades and forest walks, he began to 
upon a wild and woody tract of country, despair of extricating himself, and stopped 
They stopped about noon at a solitary for further orders. The sun was now set ; 
village, where they took refreshments and but as La Motte looked anxiously from the 
obtained directions for passing the vast forest window, he observed upon the vivid glow of 
of Fontanville, upon the borders of which the western horizon, some dark towers from 
they now were. La Motte wished at first to among the trees at a little distance, and or- 
take a guide, but he apprehended more evil dered Peter to drive towards them. *' If they 
from the disclosure he might make of his belong to a monastery," said he, "we may 
route, than he hoped for benefit from assist- probably gain admittance for the night." 
ance in the wilds of this uncultivated tract. The carriage drove along under the shade 

La Motte now designed to pass on to of "melancholy boughs," through which the 
Lyons, where he could either seek conceal- evening twilight, which yet coloured the air, 
ment in its neighbourhood, or embark on the diffused a solemnity that vibrated in thrilling 
Rhone for Geneva, should the emergency of sensations upon the hearts of the travellers, 
his circumstances hereafter require him to Expectation kept them silent. The present 
leave France. It was about twelve o'clock at scene recalled to Adeline a remembrance <rf 
noon, and he was desirous to hasten forward the late terrific circumstances, and her mind 
that he might pass the forest of Fontanville, responded but too easily to the apprehension 
and reach the town on its opposite borders of new misfortunes. La Motte alighted at 
before nightfall. Having deposited a fresh the foot of a green knoll, where the trees, 
stock of provisions in the carriage, and re- again opening to light, permitted a nearer 
ceived such directions as were necessary con- though imperfect view of the edifice, 
ceming the roads, they again set forward, and 

in a short time entered upon the forest. It 

was now the latter end of April, and the pmaptfr tt 

weather was remarkably temperate and fine. t^rtAriliK ll. 

The balmy freshness of the air, which breathed ^y^^^ ^^f^j 3j,^„^^ , ^^^ ^^esc antique towc«, 

the first pure essence of vegetation, and the And vacant courts, chili the suspended soul ! 
gentle warmth of tlie sun, whose beams Till epectation wears the face of fear; 
vivified every hue of nature and opened every And fear, half ready to become devotion, 
floweret of spring, revived Adeline, and in- Mutters a kind of mental orison, 
spired her with life and health. As she It knows not wherefore. What a kmdof being 
inhaled the breeze, her strength seemed to ^' circumstance ! Horace Walpole. 

return, and, as her eyes wandered through Hb approached, and perceived the Gothic 
the romantic glades that opened into the remains of an abbey : it stood on a kind of 
forest, her heart was gladdened with com- rude lawn, overshadowed by high and 
placent delight ; but when from these objects spreadin^^ trees, which seemed coeval with 
she turned her regard upon Monsieur and the building, and diffused a romantic gloom 
Madame La Motte, to whose tender attentions around. The greater part of the pile ap- 
she owed her life, and in whose looks she now peared to be sinking into ruins, and that 
read esteem and kindness, her bosom glowed which had withstood the ravages of tinie 
with sweet affections, and she experienced a showed the remaining features of the fabric 
force of gratitude which might be called more awful in decay. The lofty battlements, 
sublime. ' thickly enwreathed with ivy, were half de- 

For the remainder of the day they continued mo\isVied and become the residence of birds 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



II 



of prey. Huge fragments of the eastern 
tower, which was almost demolished, lay 
scattered amid the high grass- that waved 
slowly to the breexe. " The thistle shook its 
londy head ; the moss whistled to the wind." 
A Gothic gate, richly ornamented with fret- 
work, which opened into the main body of 
the edifice but which was now obstructed 
with brushwood, remained entire. Above the 
vast and magnificent portal of this gate arose 
a window of the same order, whose pointed 
arches still exhibited fragments of stained 
glass, once the pride of monkish devotion. 
La Motte, thinking it possible it might yet 
shelter some human being, advanced to the 
gate and lifted a massy knocker. The hollow 
sounds rung through the emptiness of the 
place. After waiting a few minutes he forced 
back the gate, which was heavy with iron- 
work and creaked harshly on its hinges. 

He entered what appeared to have been 
the chapel of the abbey, where the hymn of 
devotion had once been raised, and the tear 
of penitence had once been shed ; sounds 
which could now only be recalled by imagin- 
ation — ^tears of penitence, which had been 
long since fixed in fate. La Motte paused a 
moment, for he felt a sensation of sublimity 
rising into terror — a suspension of mingled 
astonishment and awe i He surveyed the 
vastness of the place, and as he contemplated 
its ruins fancy bore him back to past ages. 
•'And these walls," said he, "where once 
superstition lurked and austerity anticipated 
an earthly purgatory, now tremble over the 
mortal remains of the beings who reared 
them ! " 

The deepening gloom reminded La Motte 
that he had no time to lose, but curiosity 
prompted him to explore farther, and he 
obeyed the impulse. As he walked over ihe 
broken pavement, the sound of his steps ran 
in echoes through the place, and seemed like 
the mysterious accents of the dead, reproving 
the sacrilegious mortal who thus dared to dis- 
turb their holy precincts. 

From this chapel he passed into the nave 
of the great church, of which one window, 
more ^rfect than the rest, opened upon a 
long vista of the forest, and through this was 
seen the rich colouring of evening, melting by 
imperceptible gradations into the solemn gray 
of upper air. Dark hills, whose outline ap- 
peared distinctly upon the vivid glow of the 
horizon, closed the perspective. Several of 
the, pillars which had once supported the 
roof remained, the proud effigies of sinking 
greatness, and seemed to nod at every 
murmiu: of the blast over the fragments 
of those that had fallen a little before them. 
La Motte sighed. The comparison between 
himself and the gradation of decay which 
these colunms exhibited, was but too obvious 
ar.d affecting. "A few years," said he, "and 
I shall become like the mortals on whose 



relks I now gaze, and, like them too, I may 
be the subject of metlitation to a succfrding 
generation, which shall totter but a little while 
over the object they contemplate, ere they 
also sink into the dust." 

Retiring from the scene he walked througli 
the cloisters, till a door which communicated 
with a lofty part of the building attracted his 
curiosity. He opened this and jx-'rccived, 
across the foot of a staircase, anotlier door ; 
but now, partly checketl by tear and j>artly 
by the recollection of the surprise his family 
might feel in his absence, he returncfi witfi 
hasty steps to Tiis carriage, having wasted 
some of the precious moments of twilight and 
gained no information. 

Some slight answer to Madame I^ Motte' s 
inquiries, and a general direction to Peter to 
drive carefully on and look for a road, was 
all that his anxiety would permit him to ulter. 
The night shade fell thick around, which, 
deepened by the gloom of the forest, soon 
rendered it dangerous to proceed. Peter 
stopped, but I^ Motte persisting in his first 
determination, ordered him to go on. Peter 
ventured to remonstrate, Madame La Motte 
entreated, but I^ Motte reproved, com- 
manded, and at length repented ; for the hind 
wheel, rising upon the stump of an old tree 
which the darkness had prevented Peter from 
observing, the carriage was in an instant 
overturned. 

The party, as may be supposed, were mucli 
terrified, but no one was materially hurt ; and 
having disengaged themselves from their 
p>erilous situation, La Mottp and Peter en- 
deavoured to raise the carriage. The extent 
of this misfortune was now discovered, for 
they perceived that the wheel was broken. 
Their distress was reasonably great, for not 
only was the coach disabled from proceeding 
but it could not even afford a shelter from 
the cold dews of the night, it being im- 
possible to preserve it in an upright situa- 
tion. After a few moments' silence. La Motte 
proposed that they should return to the ruins 
they had just quitted, which lay at a very 
short distance, and pass the night in the most 
habitable part of them ; that when morning 
dawne'd, Peter should take one of the coach- 
horses, and endeavour to find a road and a 
town, from whence assistance could be pro- 
cured for repairing the carriage. This pro- 
posal was opposed by Madame La Motte, 
who shuddered at the idea of passing so many 
hours of darkness in a place so forlorn as the 
monastery. Terrors which she neither en- 
deavoured to examine or combat overcame 
her, and she told La Motte she had rather 
remain exposed to the unwholesome dews of 
night than encounter the desolation of the 
ruins. La Motte had at first felt an equal re- 
luctance to return to this spot, but having 
subdued his own feelings, he resolved not to 
yield to those ol \\\s mfe. 



12 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



The horses being now disengaged from the 
carriage, the party moved towards the edifice. 
As they proceeded, Peter, who followed 
them, struck a light, and they entered the 
ruins by the flame of sticks which he had 
collected. The partial gleams thrown across 
the fabric seemed to make its desolation more 
solemn, while the obscurity of the greater 
part of the pile heightened its sublimity, and 
led fancy on to scenes of horror. Adeline, 
who had hitherto remained silent, now uttered 
an exclamation of mingled admiration and 
fear. A kind of pleasing dread thrilled her 
bosom and filled all her soul. Tears started 
to her eyes ; she wished yet feared to go on ; 
she hung upon the arm of La Motte, and 
looked at him with a sort of hesitating in- 
terrogation. 

He opened the door of the great hall, and 
they entered ; its extent was lost in gloom. 
"Let us stay here," said Madame La Motte, 
" I will go no farther." La Motte pointed to 
the broken roof, and was proceeding, when 
he was interrupted by an uncommon noise 
which passed along the hall. They were all 
silent — it was the silence of terror. Madame 
La Motte spoke first. " Let us quit this 
spot," said she, "almost any evil is preferable 
to the feeling which now oppresses me. Let 
us retire instantly." The stillness had for some 
time remained undisturbed, and La Motte, 
ashamed of the fear he had involuntarily 
betrayed, now thought it necessary to affect a 
boldness which he did not feel. He there- 
fore opposed ridicule to the terror of Madame, 
and insisted upon proceeding. Thus com- 
pelled to acqui&ce, she traversed the hall 
with trembling steps. They came to a 
narrow passage, and Peter's sticks being 
nearly exhausted, they awaited here while he 
went in search of more. 

The almost expiring light flashed faintly 
upon the walls of the passage, showing the 
recess more horrible. Across the hall, the 
greater part of which was concealed in 
shadow, the feeble ray spread a tremulous 
gleam, exhibiting the chasm in the roof, 
while many nameless objects were seen im- 
perfectly through the dusk. Adeline, with a 
smile, inquired of La Motte if he believed in 
spirits. The question was ill-timed, for the 
present scene impressed its terrors upon 
La Motte, and in spite of endeavour he felt 
a superstitious dread stealing upon him. He 
was now, perhaps, standing over the ashes of 
the dead. If spirits were ever permitted to 
revisit the earth, this seemed the hour and 
the place most suitable for their appearance. 
La Motte remained silent. Adeline said ; 

"Were I inclined to superstition " She was 

interrupted by a return of the noise which 
had been lately heard ; it sounded down the 
passage, at whose entrance they stood, and 
sunk mduaJly away. Every heart palpitated, 
and they remmned listening in silence. A 



new subject of apprehension seized La Motte 
— the noise might proceed from banditti ; and 
he hesitated whether it would be safe to go 
on. Peter now came with a light. Madame 
refused to enter the passage. La Motte was 
not much inclined to it ; but Peter, in whom 
curiosity was more prevalent than fear, readily 
offered his services. La Motte, after some 
hesitation, suffered him to go, while he 
awaited at the entrance the result of the in- 
quiry. The extent of the passage soon con- 
cealed Peter from view, and the echoes of his 
footsteps were lost in a sound which rushed 
along the avenue, and became fainter and 
fainter till it sunk into silence. La Motte 
now called aloud to Peter, but no answer was 
returned ; at length they heard the sound of 
a distant footstep, and Peter soon after ap- 
peared, breathless and pale with fear. 

When he came within hearing of La Motte, 
he called out, "An* please, your honour, 
I've done for them, I believe, but I've had a 
hard bout. I thought I was fighting with 
the devil." 

' ' What are you speaking of?" said La Motte. 

"They were nothing but owls and rooks 
after all," continued Peter ; " but the light 
brought them all about my ears, and they 
made such a confounded clapping with their 
wings, that I thought at first I had been beset 
with a legion of devils. But I have drove 
them all out, master, and you have nothhi^ 
to fear now." 

The latter part of the sentence, intimating 
a suspicion of his courage. La Motte could 
have dispensed with, and to retrieve in some 
degree his reputation he made a point of 
proceeding through the passage. They now 
moved on with alacrity, for, as Peter said» 
"they had nothing to fear." 

The passage led into a large area, on one 
side of which, over a range of cloisters, ap- 
peared the west tower and a lofty part of the 
edifice ; the other side was open to the woods. 
La Motte led the way to a door of the tower, 
which he now perceived was the same he had 
formerly entered ; but he foimd some difiSculty 
in advancing, for the area was overgrown 
with brambles and nettles, and the light 
which Peter carried afforded only an un- 
certain gleam. When he tmclosed the door, 
the dismal aspect of the place revived the 
apprehensions of Madame La Motte, and 
extorted from Adeline an inquiry whither 
they were going. Peter held up the light to 
show the narrow staircase that wound rotund 
the tower; but La Motte, observing the 
second door, drew back the rusty bolts, and 
entered a spacious apartment, which, firom its 
style and condition, was evidently of a much 
later date than the other part of the structure ; 
though desolate and forlorn, it was very Uttle 
impaired by time ; the walls were damp, but 
not decayed ; and the glass was yet firm in 
the windows. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



13 



They passed on to a suite of apartments 
resembling Uie first they had seen, and ex- 
pressed Uieir STirprise at the incongruous 
appearance of this part of the edifice with the 
mouldering walls they had left behind. These 
apartments conducted them to a winding 
passage that received light and air through 
narrow cavities placed high in the wall, and 
was at length closed by a door barred with 
iron, which being with some difficulty opened 
they entered a vaulted room. La Motte 
surveyed it with a scrutinising eye, and en- 
deavoured to conjecture for what purpose it 
had been guarded by a door of such strength, 
but he saw little within to assist his curiosity. 
The room ' appeared to have been built in 
modem times upon a Gothic plan. Adeline 
approached a large window that formed a 
kind of recess raised by one step over the level 
of the floor ; she observed to La Motte that 
the whole floor was inlaid with Mosaic work ; 
which drew from him a remark that the style 
of this apartment was not strictly Gothic. He 
passed on to a door, which appeared on the 
opposite side of the room, and, unlocking it, 
■found himself in the great hall by which he 
had entered the fabric. 

He now perceived, what the gloom had 
before conc^ed, a spiral staircase which led 
to a gallery above ; and which from its 
present condition seemed to have been built 
with the more modem part of the fabric, 
though this also affected the Gothic mode of 
architecture. La Motte had little doubt that 
these stairs led to apartments corresponding 
-with those he had passed below, and hesitated 
■whether to explore them ; but the entreaties 
of Madame, who was much fatigued, pre- 
vailed with him to defer all further ex- 
amination. After some deliberation in which 
of the rooms they should pass the night, they 
-determined to return to that which opened 
from the tower. 

A fire was kindled on a hearth, which it is 
probable had not for many years before af- 
Ibrded the warmth of hospitality ; and Peter 
having spread the provision he had brought 
from the coach. La Motte and his family, en- 
circling the fire, partook of a repast which 
hunger and fatigue made delicious. Apprehen- 
sion gradually gave way to confidence, for ihey 
now found themselves in something like a 
human habitation, and they had leisure to 
laugh at their late terrors ; but as the blast 
shook the doors, Adeline often started and 
threw a fearful glance around. They con- 
tinued to laugh and talk cheerfully for a time, 
yet their merriment was transient, if not 
affected, for a sense of their peculiar and dis- 
tressed circumstances pressed upon their 
recollection, and sunk each individual into 
languor and pensive silence. Adeline felt the 
forlomness of her condition with energy ; she 
reflected upon the past with astonishment, and 
anticipated the future with fear. She found 



herself wholly dependent upon strangers, 
with no other claim than what distress 
demands from the common sympathy of 
kindred beings ; sighs swelled her heart, and 
the frequent tear started to her eye ; but she 
checked it ere it betrayed on her cheek the 
sorrow which she thought it would be im- 
grateful to reveal. 

La Motte at length broke this meditative 
silence by directing the fire to be renewed 
for the night and the door to be secured ; 
this seemed a necessary precaution, even in 
this solitude, and was effected by means of 
large stones piled against it, for other 
fastening there was none. It had frequently 
occurred to La Motte that tliis apparently 
forsaken edifice might be a place of refuge to 
banditti. Here was solitude to conceal them, 
and a wild and extensive forest to assist tlieir 
schemes of rapine, and to perplex with its 
labyrinths those who might be bold enough 
to attempt pursuit. These apprehensions, 
however, he hid within his own bosom, saving 
his companions from a share of the uneasiness 
they occasioned. Peter was ordered to watch 
at the door, and having given the fire a 
rousing stir, our desolate party drew round 
it, and sought in sleep a short oblivion of 
care. 

The night passed on without disturbance. 
Adeline slept, but uneasy dreams flitted before 
her fancy, and she awoke at an early hour ; 
the recollection of her sorrows rose upon her 
mind, and, yieldingto their pressure, her tears 
flowed silently and fast. That she might 
indulge them without restraint, she went to a 
distant window that looked upon an open 
part of the forest ; all without was gloom and 
silence ; she stood for some time viewing the 
shadowy scene. 

The first tender tints of morning now ap- 
peared on the verge of the horizon, stealing 
upon the darkness ; — so pure, so fine, so 
ethereal ! it seemed as if heaven was opening 
to the view. The dark mists were seen to 
roll off to the west, as the tints of light grew 
stronger, deepening the obscurity of that part 
of the hemisphere, and involving the features 
of the country below ; meanwhile, in the east, 
tlie hues became more vivid, darting a 
trembling lustre far around, till a ruddy glow, 
which fired all that part of the heavens, an- 
nounced the rising sun. At first a small line 
of inconceivable splendour emerged on the 
horizon, which, quickly expanding, the sun 
appeared in all his glory, unveiling the whole 
face of nature, vivifying every colour of the 
landscape, and sprinkling the dewy earth 
with glittering light. The low and gentle 
responses of birds, awakened by the morning 
ray, now broke the silence of the hour : their 
soft warbling rising by degrees till they 
swelled the chorus of universal gladness. 
Adeline's heart swelled too with gratitude and 
adoration. 



u 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



The scene before her soothed her mind 
and exalted her thoughts to the Great Author 
of Nature ; she uttered an involuntary prater: 
'* Father of Good, who made this glorious 
scene ! I resign myself to Thy hands ; Thou 
wilt support me under my present sorrows, 
and protect me from future evil." 

Thus confiding in the benevolence of God, 
she wiped the tears from her eyes, wjiile the 
sweet unison of conscience and reflection re- 
warded her trust •. and her mind, losing the 
feelings which had lately oppressed it, became 
tranquil and composed. 

La Motte awoke soon after, and Peter pre- 
pared to set out on his expedition. As he 
mounted his horse, "An' please you, master," 
said he, "I think we had as good look no 
farther for an habitation till better times turn 
up ; for nobody will think of looking for us 
here ; and when one sees the place by day- 
light, it's none so bad but what a little patching 
up would make it comfortable enough." 
La Motte made no reply, but he thought of 
Peter's words. During the intervals of the 
night, when anxiety had kept him waking, the 
same idea had occurred to him ; concealment 
was his only security, and this place afforded 
it. The desolation of the spot was repulsive 
to his wishes ; but he had only a choice of 
evils — a forest with liberty was not a bad 
home for one who had too much reason to 
exp)ect a prison. As he walked through the 
apartments and examined their condition 
more attentively, he perceived they might 
easily be made habitable ; and now, surveying 
them under the cheerfulness of morning, his 
design strengthened, and he mused upon the 
means of accomplishing it, which nothing 
seemed so much to obstruct as the apparent 
difficulty of procuring food. 

He communicated his thoughts to Madame 
La Motte, who felt repugnance to the scheme. 
La Motte, however, seldom consulted his 
wife till he had determined how to act ; and 
he had already resolved to be guided in this 
affair by the report of Peter. If he could dis- 
cover a town in the neighbourhood of the 
forest, where provisions and other necessaries 
could be procured, he would seek no farther 
for a place of rest. 

In the meantime he spent the anxious 
interval of Peter's absence in examining the 
ruin and walking over the environs; they 
were sweetly romantic, and the luxuriant 
woods with which they abounded seemed to 
sequester this spot from the rest of the world. 
Frequently a natural vista would yield a view 
of the country, terminated by hills, which, 
retiring in distance, faded into the blue 
horizon. A stream, various and musical in 
its course, wound at the foot of the lawn on 
which stood the abbey ; here it silently glided 
beneath the shades, feeding the flowers that 
bloomed on its banks, and diffusing dewy 
iresbasss around ; there it spread in broad 



expanse to-day, reflecting the sylvan scene 
and the wild deer that tasted its waves. 
La Motte observed everywhere a profusion of 
game ; the pheasants scarcely flew from his 
approach, and the deer gazed mildly at him 
as he passed. They were strangers to man ! 

On his return to the abbdy, La Motte 
ascended the stairs that led to the tower. 
About half way up, a door appeared in the 
wall ; it yielded without resistance to his 
hand, but a sudden noise within, accom- 
panied by a cloud of dust, made him step 
back and close the door. After waiting a few 
minutes, he again opened it, and perceived a 
large room of the more modern building. 
The remains of tapestry hung in tatters upon 
the walls, which were become the residence 
of birds of prey, whose sudden flight, on the 
opening of the door, had brought down a 
quantity of dust and occasioned the noise. 
The windows were .shattered and almost 
without glass ; but he was surprised to ob- 
serve some remains of furniture — chairs, 
whose fashion and condition bore the date of 
their antiquity ; a broken table and an iron 
grate almost consumed by rust. 

On the opposite side of the room was a 
door, which led to another apartment, pro- 
portioned like the flrst, but hung with arras 
somewhat less tattered. In one comer stood 
a small bedstead, and a few shattered chairs 
were placed roimd the walls. La Motte 
gazed with a mixture of wonder and curiosity. 
"'Tis strange," said he, "that these rooms, 
and these alone, should bear the marks of in- 
habitation ; perhaps some wretched wanderer 
like myself may have here sought refuge from 
a persecuting world ; and here, perhaps, laid 
down the load of existence ; perhaps, too, I 
have followed his footsteps but to mingle my 
dust with his I" He turned suddenly and 
was about to quit the room, when he per- 
ceived a door near the bed ; it opened into a 
closet which was lighted by one small win- 
dow, and was in the same condition as the 
apartments he had passed, except that it was 
destitute even of the remains of furniture. 
As he walked over the floor, he thought he 
felt one part of it shake beneath his steps, 
and, examining, found a trap-door. Curiosity 
prompted him to explore farther, and with 
some difficulty he opened it ; it disclosed a 
staircase which terminated in darkness. La 
Motte descended a few steps, but was un- 
willing to trust the abyss ; and after wondering 
for what purpose it was so secretly con- 
structed, he closed the trap, and quitted this 
suite of apartments. 

The stairs in the tower above were so much 
decayed that he did not attempt to ascend 
them ; he returned to the hall, and by the 
spiral staircase which he had observed the 
evening before reached the gallery, and 
found another suite of apartments entirely 
unfurnished, very much like those below. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



He renewed with Madame La Motte liis 
former conversation respecting the abbey, 
and she exerted all her endeavours to dissuade 
him from his purpose, acknowledging the 
solitary security of the spot, but pleading 
that other places might be found equally well 
adapted for concealment and more for com- 
fort. This La Motte doubted ; besides the 
forest abounded with game, which would at 
once sdOford him amusement and food ; a cir- 
cumstance, considering his small stock of 
money, by no means to be overlooked ; and 
he had suffered his mind to dwell so much 
upon the scheme that it was become a 
favourite one. 'Adeline listened in silent 
anxiety to the discourse, and waited with 
impatience the issue of Peter's report. 

The morning passed, but Peter did not 
return. Our solitary party took their dinner 
of the provision they had fortunately brought 
with them, and afterwards walked forth into 
the woods. Adeline, who never suffered any 
good to pass unnoticed because it came at- 
tended with evil, forgot for a while the 
desolation of the abbey in the beauty of the 
adjacent scenery. The pleasantness of the 
shades soothed her heart, and the varied 
features of the landscape amused her fancy ; 
she almost thought she could be contented to 
live here. Already she began to feel an in- 
terest in the concerns of her companions, and 
for Madame La Motte she felt more ; it was 
the warm emotion of gratitude and affection. 

The afternoon wore away, and they re- 
turned to the abbey. Peter was still absent, 
and his absence now began to excite surprise 
and apprehension. The approach of dark- 
ness also threw a gloom upon the hopes of 
the wanderers ; another night must be passed 
under the same forlorn circumstances as the 
preceding one ; and, what was still worse, 
with a very scanty stock of provisions. The 
fortitude of Madame La Motte now entirely 
forsook her, and she wept bitterly. Adeline's 
heart was as mournful as Madame's ; but she 
rallied her drooping spirits, and gave the first 
instance of her kindness by endeavouring to 
revive those of her friend. 

La Motte was restless and uneasy, and 
leaving the abbey, he walked alone the way 
which Peter had taken. He had not gone 
far when he perceived him between the trees, 
leading his horse. "What news, Peter?" 
hallooed La Motte. Peter came on, panting 
for breath, sgid said not a word till La Motte 
repeated the question in a tone of somewhat 
more authority. "Ah, bless you, master," 
said he, when he had taken breath to answer, 
" I am glad to see you ; I thought I should 
never have got back again ; I've met >vith a 
world of misfortunes." 

*' Well, you may relate them hereafter ; let 
me hear whether you have discovered " 

" Discovered ! " interrupted Peter, " yes, I 
am discovered with a vengeance I If your 



honour will look at my arms, you'll see how I 
am discovered ! " 

" Discoloured I I suppose you mean." said 
La Motte ; ' ' but how came you in this con- 
dition?" 

"Why, I'll tell you how it was, sir ; your 
honour knows I learned a smack of boxing of 
that Englishman that used to come with his 
master to our house ? " 

"Well, well— tell me where you have 
been." 

"I scarcely know myself, master; I've 
been where I got a sound drubbing, but 
then it was in your business, and so I don't 
mind. But if ever I meet with that rascal 
again ! " 

" You seem to like your first drubbing so 
well, that you want another, and unless you 
speak more to the purpose, you shall soon 
have one." 

Peter was now frightened into method, and 
endeavoured to proceed: "When I left the 
old abbey," said he, " I followed the wav you 
directed, and turning to the right of that 
grove of trees yonder, I looked this way and 
that to sec if I could see a house or a cottage^ 
or even a man, but not a soul of them was to 
be seen ; and so I jogged on, near the value of 
a league, I warrant, and then I came to a 
track ; * Oh ! oh ! ' says I, ' we have you now ; 
this will do ; paths can't be made without 
feet.' However, I was out in my reckoning, 
for the devil a bit of a soul could I see, and, 
after following the track this way and that 
way for the third of a league, I lost it, and 
had to find out another." 

" Is it impossible for you to speak to the 
point ?" said La Motte ; " omit these foolish 
particulars, and tell whether you have suc- 
ceeded." 

" Well then, master, to be short, for that's 
the nearest way after all, I wandered a long 
while at random, I did not know where, all 
through a forest like this, and I took special 
care to note how the trees stood, that I might 
find my way back. At last I came to another 
path, and was sure I should find something 
now, though I had found nothing before, for 
I could not be mistaken twice ; so, peeping 
between the trees, I spied a cottage, and I 
gave my horse a lash that sounded through 
the forest, and I was at the door in a minute. 
They told me there was a town about half a 
league off, and bade me follow the track and 
it would bring me there ; so I did ; and my 
horse, I believe, smelt the com in the manger 
by the rate he went at. I inquired for a 
wheelwright, and was told there was but one 
in the place, and he could not be found. I 
waited and waited, for I knew it was in vain 
to think of returning without doing my 
business. The man at last came home from 
the country, and I told him how long I had 
waited ; ' For,' says I, ' I knew it was in vain 
to return vrithovil mj b>iSYaft&^.' " 



i6 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



" Do be less tedious," said Ijh Motte, " if it 
is in thy nature." 

" It is in ray nature," answered Peter, "and 
if it was more in my nature your honour 
should have it all. Would you think it, sir, 
the fellow had the impudence to ask a louis- 
d'or for mending the coach- wheel? I believe 
in ray conscience he saw I was in a hurry, 
and could not do without him. ' A louis-d'or ! ' 
says I, ' my master shall give no such price ; 
he sha'n't be imposed upon by no such rascal 
as you.' Whereupon the fellow looked glum, 
and gave me a dose o' the chops ; with this I 
up with my fist and gave him another, and 
should have beat him presently if another 
man had not come in, and then I was obliged 
to give up." 

"And so you are retimied as wise as you 
went?" 

"Why, master, I hope I have too much 
spirit to submit to a rascal, or let you submit 
to one either ; besides, I have bought some 
nails, to try if I can't mend the wheel myself, 
I had always a hand at carpentry." 

"Well, I commend your zeal in my cause, 
'but on this occasion it was rather ill-timed. 
And what have you got in that basket?" 

"Why, master, 1 bethought me that we 
-could not get away from this place till the 
carriage was ready to draw us ; ' And in the 
meantime,' says I, 'nobody can live without 
victuals, so I'll e'en lay out the little money I 
have, and take a basket with me.' " 

" That's the only wise thing you have done 
yet, and this, indeed, redeems your blunders." 

" Why now, master, it does my heart good 
to hear you speak ; I knew I was doing for 
the best all the while ; but I've had a hard 
job to find my way back ; and here's another 
piece of ill-luck, for the horse has got a thorn 
in his foot." 

La Motte made inquiries concerning the 
town, and found it was capable of supplying 
him with provisions, and what little furniture 
was necessary to render the abbey habitable. 
This intelligence almost settled his plans, and 
he ordered Peter to return on the following 
morning and make inquiries concerning the 
abbey. If the answers were favourable to his 
wishes, he commissioned him to buy a cart, 
and load it with some furniture, and some 
materials necessary for repairing the modern 
apartments. Peter stared : " What, does your 
honour mean to live here ?" 

" Why, suppose I do ? " 

" Why then your honour has made a \vise 
determination, accordingtomyhint ; for your 
honour knows I said " 

"Well, Peter, it is not necessary to repeat 
what you said ; perhaps I had determined on 
the subject before." 

"Egad, master, you're in the right, and 

I'm glad of it, for, I believe, we shall not 

'quickly be disturbed here, except by the rooks 

^nndowls. Yes, yes—1 warrant I'll make it a 



place fit for a king ; and as for the town, one 
may get anything there, I'm sure of that ; 
though they think no more about this place 
than they do about India, or England, or any 
of those places." 

They now reached the abbey, where Peter 
was received with great joy ; but the hopes of 
his mistress and Adeline were repressed when 
they learned that he returned without having 
executed his commission, and heard his account 
of the town. La Motte's orders to Peter were 
heard with almost equal concern by Madame 
and Adeline ; but the latter concealed her un- 
easiness, and used all her dForts to overcome 
that of her friend. The sWeetness of her 
behaviour, and the air of satisfaction she 
assumed, sensibly affected Madame, and dis- 
covered to her a source of comfort which she 
had overlooked. The affectionate attentions 
of her young friend promised to console her 
for the want of other society, and her con- 
versation to enliven the hours which might 
otherwise be passed in painful regret. 

The remarks and general behaviour of 
Adeline already bespoke a good understanding 
and an amiable heart, but she had yet more — 
she had genius. She was now in her nine- 
teenth year ; her figure of the middlling size, 
and turned to the most exquisite proportion ; 
her hair was dark auburn, her eyes blue, and 
whether they sparkled with intelligence or 
melted with tenderness they were equally 
attractive ; her form had the airy lightness of 
a nymph, and, when she smiled, her coun- 
tenance might have been drawn for the younger 
sister of Hebe : the captivations of her beauty 
were heightened by the grace and simplicity 
of her manners, and confirmed by the intrinsic 
value of a heart 

That might be shrin'd in crystal, 
And have all its movements scan'd. 

Annette now kindled the fire for the night : 
Peter's basket was opened, and supper pre- 
pared. Madame La Motte was still pensive 
and silent, which Adeline observing, she said 
cheerfully, "There is scarcely any condition 
so bad but we may, one time or other, wish 
we had not quitted it. Honest Peter, when 
he was bewildered in the forest, or had two 
enemies to encounter instead of one, confesses 
he wished himself at the abbey. And I am 
certain there is no situation so destitute but 
comfort may be extracted fi-oni it. The blaze 
of this fire shines yet more ch^rfuUy from 
the contrasted dreariness of the place, and 
this plentiful repast is made yet more deli- 
cious from the temporary want we have suf- 
fered. Let us enjoy the good and forget the 
evil." 

"You speak, my dear," replied Madame 
La Motte, "like one whose spirits have not 
been often depressed by misfortune " (Adeline 
sighed), "and whose hopes are, therefore, 
vigorous," 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 17 

*'Long suffering," said La Motte, "has spot. The abbey was now, therefore, nbaa- 

subdued in our minds that elastic energy doned to decay. 

which repels the pressure of evil and dances La Motte ruminated upon tliis account, 

to the bound of joy. But I speak in rhapsody. At first it called up unpleasant ideas, but 

though only from the remembrance of such a they were soon dismissed, and considerations 

time. I once, like you, Adeline, could extract more interesting to his welfare took place : 

comfort from most situations." he congratulated himself that he had now 

"And may now, my dear sir," said found a spot where he was not likely to be 

Adeline ; " still believe it possible, and you either discovered or disturbed ; yet it could 

will find it so." not escape him that there was a strange 

"The illusion is gone — I can no longer coincidence between one part of Peter's 

deceive myself." narrative and the condition of the chambers 

"Pardon me, sir, if I say it is now only that opened from the tower above-stairs. The 

you deceive yourself, by suffering the cloud of remains of furniture, of which the other 

sorrow Xo tinge every object you look upon." apartments were void — the solitary bed— the 

"It may be so," said La Motte; "bullet number and connection of the rooms, were 

us leave the subject." circumstances that united to confirm his 

After supper the doors were secured, as opinion. This, however, he concealed in his 

before, for the night, and the wanderers re- own breast, for he already perceived that 

signed themselves to repose. Peter's account had not assisted in reconciling 

On the following morning, Peter again set his family to the necessity of dwelling at the 

out for the little town of Auboine, and the abbey. 

hours of his absence were again spent by But they had only to submit in silence, and 

Madame La Motte and Adeline in much whatever disagreeable apprehension might 

anxiety and some hope ; for the intelligence intrude upon them, they now appeared willing 

he might bring concerning the abbey might to suppress the expression of it, Peter, indeed, 

yet release them from the plans of La Motte. was exempt from any evil of this kind ; he 

Towards the close of day he was descried knew no fear, and his mind was now wholly 

coming slowly on ; and the cart, which ac- occupied with his approaching business, 

companied him, too certainly confirmed their Madame La Motte, with a placid kind of 

fears. He brought materials for repairing the despair, endeavoured to reconcile herself to 

place, and some furniture. that which no effort of understanding could 

Of the abbey he gave an account of which teach her to avoid, and which an indulgence in 

the following is the substance : It belonged, lamentation could only make more intolerable. 

together with a large part of the adjacent Indeed, though a sense of the immediate 

forest, to a nobleman who now resided with inconveniences to be endured at the abbey 

his family on a remote estate. He inherited had made her oppose the scheme of living 

it, in right of his wife, from his father-in-law, there, she did not really know how their 

who had caused the more modern apartments situation could be improved by removal ; yet 

to be erected, and had resided in them some her thoughts often wandered towards Paris, 

part of every year for the purposes of shooting and reflected the retrospect of past times, with 

and hunting. It was reported that some the images of weeping friends left, perhaps, 

person was, soon after it came to the present for ever. The affectionate endearments of 

possessor, brought secretly to the abbey and her only son, whom, from the danger of 

confined in these apartments ; who or what his situation and the obscurity of hers, she 

he was had never been conjectured, and what might reasonably fear never to see again, arose 

became of him nobody knew. The report upon her memory and overcame her fortitude. 

died gradually away, and many persons en- "Why, why was I reserved for this hour?" 

tirely disbelieved the whole of it. But, however would she say, "and what will be my years 

this affair might be, certain it was the present to come ?" 

owner had visited the abbey only two summers Adeline had no retrospect of past delight 

since his succeeding to it ; and the furniture, to give emphasis to present calamity — no 

after some time, was removed. weeping friends — no dear regretted objects to 

TTiis circumstance had at first excited point the edge of sorrow, and throw a sickjy 

surprise, and various reports arose in con- hue upon her future prospects ; she knew not 

sequence, but it was difficult to know what yet the pangs of disappointed hope, or the 

ought to be believed. Among the rest, it was acuter sting of self-accusation ; she had no 

said that strange appearances had been misery but what patience could assuage, or 

observed at the abbey, and uncommon noises fortitude overcome. 

heard ; and though this report had been At the dawn of the following day Peter 

ridiculed by sensible persons as the idle arose to his labour : he proceeded with aiao- 

superstition of ignorance, it had fastened so rity, and, in a few days, two of the lower 

strongly upon the minds of the common apartments were so much altered for the 

people, that for the last seventeen years none better that La Motte began to eicult, aivd bs& 

of the peasantry had ventured to approach the family to perceive xY\aX \he\i ^\\.>3a5assa.'«wcM^^ 



I8 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 

not be so miserable as they had imagined, and endeavour to fix his attention to the words 

The furniture Peter had already brought was his lips repeated ; but his mind sufifered little 

disposed in these rooms, one of which was abstraction from its own cares, and the senti- 

the vaulted apartment. Madame La Motte ment he pronounced left no trace behind it. 

furnished this as a sitting-room, preferring it Sometimes he conversed, but oftener sat in 

for its large Gothic window, that descended gloomy silence, musing upon the past, or an- 

almost to the floor, admitting a prospect of tidpating the ^ture. 

the lawn and the picturesque scenery of the At these moments Adeline, with a sweetness 

surrounding woods. almost irresistible, endeavoured to enliven his 

Peter having returned to Auboine for a spirits and to withdraw him from himself, 

further supply, all the lower apartments were Seldom she succeeded, but when she did the 

in a few weeks not only habitable but com- grateful looks of Madame La Motte, and the 

fortable. These, however, being insufficient benevolent feelings of her own bosom, realised 

for the accommodation of the family, a room the cheerfulness she had at first only assumed, 

above-stairs was prepared for Adeline ; it was Adeline's mind had the happy art, or, per- 

the chamber that opened immediately from haps, it were more just to say the happy 

the tower, and she preferred it to those be- nature, of accommodating itself to her situft- 

yond, because it was less distant from the tion. Her present condition, though forlorn, 

family, and the windows fronting an avenue was not devoid of comfort, and this comfort 

of the forest afforded a more extensive pros- was confirmed by her virtues. So much she 

pect. The tapestry that was decayed and won upon the affections of her protectors, that 

hung loosely from the walls, was now nailed Madame La Motte loved her as her child, and 

up and made to look less desolate ; and. La Motte himself, though a man little sus- 

though the room had still a solemn aspect ceptible of tenderness, could not be insensible 

from its spaciousness and the narrowness of to her solicitudes. Whenever he relaxed 

the windows, it was not uncomfortable. from the sullenness of misery, it was at the 

The first night that Adeline retired hither influence of Adeline, 
she slept little ; the solitary air of the place Peter regularly brought a weddy supply of 
affected her spirits ; the more so, perhaps, provision from Auboine, and, on those occa- 
becausc she had, with friendly consideration, sions, always quitted the town by a route 
endeavoured to support them in the presence contrary to that leading to the abbey. Several 
of Madame La Motte. She remembered the weeks having passed without molestation. La 
narrative of Peter, several circumstances of Motte dismissed all apprehension of pursuit, 
which had impressed her imagination in spite and at length became tolerably reconciled to 
of her reason, and she found it difficult wholly the complexion of his circumstances. As 
to subdue apprehension. At one time terror habit and effort strengthened the fortitude of 
so strongly seized her mind that she had even Madame La Motte, the features of misfortune 
oixined the door with an intention of calling appeared to soften. The forest, which at first 
Madame La Motte ; but, listening for a seemed to her a frightful solitude, had lost 
moment on the stairs of the tower, everything its terrific aspect ; and that edifice, whose 
seemed still ; at length, she heard the voice half-demolished walls and gloomy desolation 
of La Motte speaking cheerfully, and the had struck her mind with the force of melan- 
absurdity of her fears struck her forcibly ; she choly and dismay, was now beheld as a do- 
blushed that she had for a moment submitted mestic asylum and a safe refuge fix)m the 
to them, and returned to her chamber wonder- storms of power, 
ing at herself. She was a sensible and highly-accomplished 

woman, and it became her chief dehg-ht to 

form the rising graces of Adeline, who had, 

r'tTAryri? ^^ ^^^ hQQVi ab-eady shown, a sweetness of 

CHAFrER in. disposition which made her quick to repay 

instruction with improvement and indulgence 

Are not these woods with love. Never was Adeline so pleased as 

More free from peril than the en^aous court? when she anticipated her wishes, and never 

Th^J^^in"^^ JiS-lri!f.r!! .'? *"• f"^^""' so diligent as when she was employed in her 

1 he seasons difference, as the icy fang , *» «,, ,..^, «. . c X.^\ ..^^\.^^^ 

And churUsh chiding of the winter's wind. business The little affaurs of the household 

Shakspeare. she overlooked and managed with such admi- 
rable exactness, that Madame La Motte had 

La Motte arranged his little plan of living, neither anxiety nor care concerning them. 

His mornings were usually spent in shooting And Adehne formed for herself in this barren 

or fishing, and the dinner thus provided by his situation many amusements that occasionally 

industry he rehshed with a keener appetite banished the remembrance of her misfortimes. 

than had ever attended him at the luxurious La Motte's books were her chief consolation, 

tables of Paris. The afternoons he passed With one of these she would frequently 

with his family ; sometimes he would select a ramble into the forest, to where the river, 

book from the few be had brought with him, winding through a glade, diffused coolness» 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



19 



tmd with its murmuring accents invited re- 
pose ; there she would seat herself, and, 
resigned to the illusions of the page, pass 
many hours in oblivion of sorrow. 

Here, too, when her mind was tranquil liscd 
by the surrounding scenery, she wooed the 
gentle muse and indulged in ideal happiness. 
The delight of these moments she commemo- 
rated in the following address : — 

TO THE VISIONS OP FANCY. 

Dear, wild illusions of creative mind, 

Whose varying hues arise to Fancy's art, 
And by her magic force are swift combin'd 

In forms that please and scenes that touch the 
heart — 
Oh ! wh^her at her voice ye soft assume 

The pensive grace of sorrow drooping low ; 
Or rise sublime on Terror's lofty plume. 

And shake the soul with wildly-thrilling woe ; 
Or, sweetly bright, your gayer tmts ye spread. 

Bid scenes of pleasure steal upon my view, 
LiOve wave his purple pinions o'er my head. 

And wake the tender thought to passion true ; 
Oh still — ^ye shadowy forms^-attend my lonely hours. 
Still chase my real cares with yoiur illusive powers ! 

Madame La Motte had frequently expressed 
curiosity concerning the events of Adeline's life, 
and by what circumstances she had been thrown 
into a situation so perilous and mysterious as 
that in which La Motte had found her. Adeline 
had given a brief account of the manner in 
which she had been brought thither, but had 
always, with tears, entreated to be spared for 
that time from a particular relation of her 
history. Her spirits were not then equal to 
retrospection, but now that they were soothed 
by quiet and strengthened by confidence, she 
one day gave Madame La Alotte the follow- 
ing narration : 

**Iam the only child," said Adeline, "of 
Louis de St. Pierre, a chevalier of family, but 
of small fortune, who for many years resided 
at Paris. Of my mother I have a faint re- 
membrance ; I lost her when I was only seven 
years old, and this was my first misfortune. 
At her death my father gave up housekeeping, 
boarded me in a convent, and quitted Paris. 
TTius was I, at this early period of my life, aban- 
doned to strangers. My father came some- 
times to Paris ; he then visited me, and I well 
remember the grief I used to feel when he 
bade me farewefl. On these occasions, which 
wrung my heart with grief, he appeared un- 
moved ; so that I often thought he had little 
tenderness for me. But he was my father, 
and the only person to whom I could look up 
for protection and love. 

" In this convent I continued till I was 
twelve years old. A thousand times I had 
entreated my father to take me home ; but at 
first motives of prudence, and afterwards of 
avarice, prevented him. I was now removed 
from this convent and placed in another, 
where I learned my father intended I should 



take the veil. I will not attempt to express 
my surprise and grief on this occasion. Too 
long I had been ininuired in the walls of a 
cloister, and too much had I seen of the sullen 
misery of its votaries not to feel horror and 
disgust at the prospect of being added to 
their number. 

' ' Tlie lady abbess was a woman of rigid 
decorum and severe devotion ; exact in the 
observance of every detail of form, and never 
forgave an offence against ceremony. It was 
her method, when she wanted to make con- 
verts to her order, to denounce and terrify, 
rather than to persuade and allure. Hers 
were the arts of cunnin|f practised upon fear, 
not those of sophistication upon reason. She 
employed numberless stratagems to gain me 
to her purpose, and they all wore tlie com- 
plexion of her character. But in the life to 
which she would have devoted me I saw too 
many forms of real terror to be overcome by 
the influence of her ideal host, and was reso- 
lute in rejecting the veil. Here I passed several 
years of miserable resistance against cruelty 
and superstition. My father I seldom saw ; 
when I did, I entreated him to alter my desti- 
nation, but he objected that his fortune was 
insufficient to support me in the world, and at 
length denounced vengeance on my head, if I 
persisted in disobedience. 

"You, my dear madam, can form little 
idea of the wretchedness of my situation, con- 
demned to perpetual imprisonment, and 
imprisonment of the most dreadful kind, or 
to the vengeance of a father from whom I had 
no appeal. My resolution relaxed — for some 
time I paused upon the choice of evils — ^but at 
length the horrors of a monastic life rose so 
fully to my view, that fortitude gave way 
before them. Excluded from the cheerful 
intercourse of society — from the pleasant view 
of nature —almost from the light of day — con- 
demned to silence — rigid formality — absti- 
nence and penance — condemned to forego the 
delights of a world which imagination painted 
in the gayest and most alluring colours, and 
whose hues were, perhaps, not the less capti- 
vating because they were only ideal ; — such was 
the state to which I was destined. Again my 
resolution was invigorated ; my father's cruelty 
subdued tenderness and roused indignation. 
'Since he can forget,' said I, 'the affection of a 
parent, and condemn his child without remorse 
to wretchedness and despair — the bond of 
filial and parental duty no longer subsists 
between us — he has himself dissolved it, and 
I will yet struggle for liberty and life.' 

"Finding me unmoved by menace, the 
lady abbess had now recourse to more subtle 
measures ; she condescended to smile, and 
even to flatter ; but hers was the distorted 
smile of cunning, not the gracious emblem of 
kindness ; it provoked disgust, instead of in- 
spiring affection. She painted the character 
of a vestal in ihe mosl \iea.\x<\lv\ <^'^\s» ^"^ «xn.— 



20 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



its holy innocence— its mild dignity— its sub- 
lime devotion. I sighed as she spoke. This 
siic regarded as a favourable symptom, and 
proceeded on her picture with more anima- 
tion. JShe described the serenity of a monastic 
lile — its security from the seductive charms, 
restless passions, and sorrowful vicissitudes of 
the world — the rapturous delights of religion, 
and the sweet, reciprocal affection of the 
sisterhood. 

" So highly she finished the piece, that the 
lurking lines of cunning would, to an inexpe- 
rienced eye, have escaped detection. Mine 
was too sorrowfully informed. Too often had 
I witnessed the secret tear and bursting Sigh 
of vain regret, the sullen pinings of discontent, 
and the mute anguish of despair. My silence 
and my manner assured her of my incredulity, 
and it was with difficulty that she preserved a 
decent composure. 

"My father, as may be imagined, was 
highly incensed at my perseverance, which 
he called obstinacy ; but, what will not be so 
easily believed, he soon after relented, and 
appointed a day to take me from the convent. 
Oh judge of my feelings when I received this 
intelligence ! The joy it occasioned awakened 
all my gratitude ; I forgot the former cruelty 
of my father, and that the present indulgence 
was less the effect of his kindness than of my 
resolution. I wept that I could not indulge 
his every wish. 

"What days of blissful expectation were 
those that preceded my departure ! The world, 
from which I had been hitherto secluded — 
the world, in which my fancy had been so 
often delighted to roam — whose paths were 
strewn with fadeless roses — whose every 
scene smiled in beauty and invited to delight 
— where all the people were good, and all the 
good happy — ah ! then that world was 
bursting upon my view. Let mc catch the 
rapturous remembrance before it vanish ! It 
is like passing lights of autumn, that gleam 
for a moment on a hill and then leave it to 
darkness. I counted the days and hours 
that withheld mc from this fairy land. It 
was in the convent only that people were 
deceitful and cruel : it was there only that 
misery dwelt. I was quitting it all ! How I 
pitied the poor nuns that were to be left behind. 
I would have given half that world I prized so 
much, had it been mine, to have taken them 
out with me. 

" The long-wished-for day at last arrived. 
My father came, and for a moment my joy 
was lost in the sorrow of bidding farewell 
to my poor companions, for whom I had 
never felt such warmth of kindness as at this 
mstant. I was soon beyond the gates of the 
convent. I looked around me and viewed 
the vast vault of heaven, no longer bounded 
py monastic walls, and the green earth ex- 
tended m hill and dale to the round verge of 
the honzon I My heart danced with delight, 



tears swelled in my eyes, and for some 
moments I was imable to speak. My 
thoughts rose to Heaven in sentiments of 
gratitude to the Giver of all good. 

"At length I turned to my father. *Dear 
sir,' said I, ' how I thank you for my deliver- 
ance, and how I wish I could do evei^tbing 
to oblige you.' 

" 'Return, then, to your convent,' said he, 
in a harsh accent. I shuddered ; his look 
and manner jarred the tone of my feelings ; 
they struck discord upon my heart, which 
had before responded only to harmony. The 
ardour of joy was in a moment repressed, 
and every object around me was saddened 
with the gloom of disappointment. It was 
not that I suspected my father would take me 
back to the convent ; but that his feelings 
semed so very dissonant to the joy and 
gratitude which I had but a moment before 
felt and expressed to him. Pardon, madam,, 
a relation of these trivial circumstances ; the 
strong vicissitudes of feeling which they 
impressed upon my heart make me think 
them important, when they are, perhaps, 
only disgusting." 

" No, my dear," said Madame La Motte, 
" they are interesting to me ; they illustrate 
little traits of character which I love to 
observe. You are worthy of all my regards, 
and from this moment I give my tenderest 
pity to your misfortunes, and my affection to 
your goodness." 

These words melted the heart of Adeline ; 
she kissed the hand which Madame held out, 
and remained a few minutes silent. At 
length she said : ' ' May I deserve this good- 
ness I and may I ever be thankful to God, 
who, in giving me such a friend, has raised 
me to comfort and hope ! 

' ' My father's house was situated a few 
leagues on the other side of Paris, and, in 
our way to it, we passed through that city. 
What a novel scene I Where were now the 
solemn faces, the demure manners, I had 
been accustomed to see in the convent? 
Every countenance was here animated, either 
by business or pleasure ; every step was airy, 
and every smile was gay. All the people 
appeared hke friends; they looked and 
smiled at me ; I smiled again, and wished to 
have told them how pleased I was. * How 
delightful,' said I, * to live surrounded by 
friends ! ' 

"What crowded streets! What magnifi- 
cent hotels ! What splendid equipages I I 
scarcely observed that the streets were 
narrow or the way dangerous. What bustle, 
what tumult, what delight I I could never 
be sufficiently thankful that I was removed 
from the convent. Again I was going to ex- 
press my gratitude to my father, but his looks 
forbade me, and I was silent. I am too 
diffuse ; even the faint forms which memory 
teflcct.s of past delight are grateful to the 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



21 



Tienrt. The shadow of pleasure is still gazed 
npon with a melancholy enjoyment, tlK)ugh 
the substance is fled beyond our reach. 

" Having quited Paris, which I left with 
many sighs, and gazed upon till the towers 
of every church dissolved in distance from 
my view, we entered upon a gloomy and 
unfrequented road. It was evening when we 
reached a wild heath ; I looked round in 
search of a human dwelling, but could find 
none ; and not a human being was to be 
seen. I experienced something of what I 
used to fed in the convent ; my heart had 
not been so sad since I left it. Of my father, 
who still sat in silence, I inquired if we were 
near home ; he answered in the affirmative. 
Night came on, however, before we reached 
the place of our destination ; it was a lone 
house on the waste ; but I need not describe 
it to you, madam. 'When the carriage 
stopped, two men appeared at the door and 
assisted us to alight ; so gloomy were their 
<x)untenances, and so few their words, I 
almost fancied myself again in the convent. 
Certain it is I had not seen such melancholy 
faces since I quitted it. 'Is this a part of the 
world I have so fondly contemplated?' 
said I. 

' • The interior appearance of the house was 
desolate and mean ; I was surprised that my 
father had chosen such a place for his habita- 
tion, and also that no woman was to be seen ; 
but I knew that inquiry would only produce 
reproof, and was therefore silent. At sup- 
per, the two men I had before seen sat down 
with us ; they said little, but seemed to ob- 
serve me much. I was confused and dis- 
pleased, which, my father noticing, frowned 
at them with a look which convinced me he 
meant more than I comprehended. When 
the cloth was drawn, my father took my hand 
and conducted me to the door of ray cham- 
ber ; having set down the candle and wislied 
me good-night, he left me to my own solitary 
thoughts. 

'* How different were they from those I had 
indulged a few hours before ! Then expecta- 
tion, hope, delight, danced before me ; now 
melancholy and disappointment chilled the 
ardour of my mind and discoloured my 
future prospect. The appearance of every- 
thing around conduced to depress me. On 
the floor lay a small bed without curtains or 
hangings ; two old chairs and a table were all 
the remaining furniture in the room. I went 
to the window, with an intention of looking 
out upon the surrounding scene, and found it 
was grated. I was shocked at this circum- 
stance, and, comparing it with the lonely 
situation and the strange appearance of the 
house, together with the countenances and 
behaviour of the men who had supped with 
us, I was lost in a labyrinth of conjecture. 

"At length I lay down to sleep ; but the 
anxiety of my mind prevented repose ; 



gloomy, unpleasing images flitted l)efore my 
fancy, and I fell into a sort of waking dream ; 
I thought that I was in a lonely forest with 
my father ; his looks were severe, and Ins 
gestures menacing. He up!>raidcd me lor 
leaving the convent, and, while he spok«*, 
drew from his pocket a mirror, which he h';ld 
before my face ; I looked in it and saw —my 
blood now thrills as I repeat it — I saw mystMf 
wounded, and bleeding profusely. Then I 
thought myself in the house again, and sud- 
denly heard these words, in accents so dis- 
tinct that, for some time after I awoke, ! 
could scarcely believe them ideal : ' Depart 
this house, destruction hovers here.' 

" I was awakened by a footstep on the 
stairs ; it was my father retiring to his cham- 
ber ; the lateness of the hour surprised me, 
for it was past midnight. 

"On the following morning, the party of 
the preceding evening assembled at breakfast, 
and were as gloomy and silent as before. 
The table was spread by a boy of my father's ; 
but the cook and the housemaid, whatever 
they might be, were invisible. 

" The next morning I was surprised, on at- 
tempting to leave my chamber, to find the 
door locked. I waited a considerable time 
before I ventured to call ; when I did, no 
answer was returned ; I then went to the win- 
dow, and called more loudly, but my own 
voice was still the only sound I heard. Near 
an hour passed in a state of surprise and 
terror not to be described. At length I heard 
a f)erson coming upstairs, and I renewed the 
call. I was answered that my father had 
that morning set off for Paris, whence he 
would return in a few days ; in the mean- 
while he had ordered me to be confined in 
my chamber. On my expressing surprise 
and apprehension at this circumstance, I was 
assured I had nothing to fear, and that I 
should live as well as if I was at liberty. 

' ' The latter part of this speech seemed to 
contain an odd kind of comfort ; I made little 
reply, but submitted to necessity. Once more 
I was abandoned to sorrowful reflection ; what 
a day was the one I now passed ! alone, and 
agitated with grief and apprehension. I en- 
deavoured to conjecture the cause of this 
harsh treatment ; and at length concluded it 
was designed by my father as a punishment 
for my former disobedience. But why aban- 
don me to the power of strangers, to men 
whose countenances bore the stamp of villany 
so strongly as to impress even my inexpe- 
rienced mind with terror ! Surmise involved 
me only deeper in perplexity, yet I found it 
impossible to forbear pursuing the subject ; 
and the day was divided between lamentation 
and conjecture. Night at length came, and 
such a night I Darkness brought new ter- 
rors ; I looked round the chamber for some 
means of fastening my door on the inside, but 
could perceive none ; al VasX 1 ^isyc^xv^^^ \k> 



22 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



place the back of a chair in an oblique direc- 
tion, so as to render it secure. 

' ' I had scarcely done this, and laid down 
upon my bed in my clothes — not to sleep, but 
to watch — when I heard a rap at the door of 
the house, which was opened and shut so 
quickly that the person who had knocked 
seemed only to deliver a letter or message. 
Soon after, I heard voices at intervals in a 
room below-stairs, sometimes speaking very 
low, and sometimes rising all together, as if 
in dispute. Something more excusable than 
curiosity made me endeavour to distinguish 
what was said, but in vain ; now and then a 
word or two reached me, and once I heard 
my name repeated, but no more. 

"Thus passed the hours till midnight, 
when all became still. I had lain for some 
time in a state between fear and hope, when 
I heard the lock of my door gently moved 
backward and forward ; I started up and lis- 
tened ; for a moment it was still, then the 
noise returned, and I heard a whispering 
without ; my spirits died away, but I was yet 
sensible. Presently an effort was made at the 
door, as if to force it ; I shrieked aloud, and 
immediately heard the voices of the men I 
had seen at my father's table ; they called 
loudly for the door to be opened, and on my 
returning no answer, uttered dreadful execra- 
tions. I had just strength sufficient to move 
to the window, in the desperate hope of es- 
caping thence ; but my feeble efforts could 
not even shake the bars. Oh ! how can I 
recollect these moments of horror, and be 
sufficiently thankful that I am now in safety 
and comfort ! 

' ' They remained some time at the door, 
then they quitted it, and went downstairs. 
How my heart revived at every step of their 
departure 1 I fell upon my knees, thanked 
God that he had preserved me this time, and 
implored His further protection. I was rising 
from this short prayer, when suddenly I heard 
a noise in a different part of the room ; and, 
on looking round, I perceived the door of a 
small closet open and two men enter the 
chamber. 

"They seized me, and I sunk senseless in 
their arms ; how long I remained in this con- 
dition I know not ; but on reviving, I per- 
ceived myself again alone, and heard several 
voices from below-stairs. I had presence of 
mind to run to the door of the closet, which 
afforded the only chance of escape — ^but it was 
locked ! I then recollected it was possible 
that the ruffians might have forgot to turn the 
key of the chamber-door, which was held by 
the chair ; but here also I was disappointed. 
I clasped my hands in an agony of despair, 
and stood for some time immovable. 

"A violent noise from below roused me, 
and soon after I heard people ascending the 
stairs ; I now gave myself up for lost. Tlic 
steps approached, the door of the closet was 



again unlocked. I stood calmly, and again 
saw the men enter the chamber ; I neither 
spoke nor resisted : the faculties of my soul 
were wrought up beyond the power of feeling, 
as a violent blow on the body stuns for a 
while the sense of pain. They led me down- 
stairs — the door of a room below was thrown 
open, and I beheld a stranger. It was then 
that my senses returned ; I shrieked and re- 
sisted, but was forced along. It is unneces- 
sary to say that this stranger was Monsieur La 
Motte, or to add that I shall for ever bless 
him as my deliverer." 

Adeline ceased to speak ; Madame La 
Motte remained silent. There were some 
circumstances in Adeline's narrative which 
raised all her curiosity. She asked if Adeline 
believed her father to be a party in this 
mysterious affair. Adeline — ^though it was 
impossible to doubt that he had been prin- 
cipally and materially concerned in some part 
of it — thought, or said she thought, he was 
innocent of any intention against her life. 

"Yet what motive," said Madame La 
Motte, * ' could there be for a d^^ree of cruelty 
so apparently unprofitable ? " 

Here the inquiry ended ; and Adeline con- 
fessed she had pursued it till her mind shrunk 
from all further research. 

The S3rmpathy which such uncommon mis- 
fortune excited Madame La Motte now ex- 
pressed wi^out reserve, and this eicpressioa 
of it strengthened the bond of mutual friend- 
ship. Adeline felt her spirits relieved by the 
disclosure she had made to Madame La 
Motte, and the latter acknowledged the value 
of the confidence, by an increase of afifeo- 
tionate attentions. 



CHAPTER IV. 

My May of life 
Is falln into the sear, the yellow leaf. 

Shakspeasb. 

Full oft unknowing and unknown 
He wore his endless noons alone, 

Amid th' autumnal wood ; 
Oft was he wont, in hasty fit, ^ 
Abrupt the social board to quit. 

Warton. 

La Motte had now passed above a month in 
this seclusion ; and his wife had the pleasure 
to see him recover tranquillity, and even 
cheerfulness. In this pleasure Adeline warmly 
participated ; and she might justly have con- 
gratulated herself as one cause of his restora- 
tion — her cheerfulness and deUcate attention 
had effected what Madame La Motte's greater 
anxiety had failed to accomplish. La Motte 
did not seem regardless of her amiable dispo- 
sition, and sometimes thanked her in a manner 
more earnest than was usual with him. She 
in her turn considered him as her only pro- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



^3 



tector, and now felt towards him the affection 
of a daughter. 

The time she had spent in this peaceful 
retirement had softened the remembrance of 
past events, and restored her mind to its 
natural tone ; and when memory brought 
back to her view her former short and romantic 
expectations of happiness, though she gave 
a sigh to the rapturous illusion, she less 
lamented the disappointment than rejoiced in 
her present security and comfort. 

But the satisfaction which La Motte's 
cheerfulness diffused around him was of 
short continuance — he became suddenly 
gloomy and reserved — the society of his family 
was no loneer grateful to him ; and he would 
spend whole hours in the most secluded parts 
of the forest, devoted to melancholy and secret 
grief. He did not, as formerly, mdulgc the 
humoiur of his sadness without restraint in the 
presence of others ; he now endeavoured to 
conceal it, and affected a cheerfulness that was 
too artifidal to escape detection. 

Hisservant Peter, either impelled by curiosity 
or kindness, sometimes followed him unseen 
into the forest. He observed him frequently 
retire to one particular spot in a remote part, 
which having gained he always disappeared 
before Peter — ^who was obliged to follow at a 
distance — could exactly notice where. All 
his endeavours, now prompted by wonder and 
invigorated by disappointment, were unsuc- 
cessful, and he was still compelled to endure 
the tortures of unsatisfied curiosity. 

This change in the manners and habits of 
her husband was too conspicuous to pass un- 
observed by Madame La Motte, who endea- 
voured by all the stratagems which affection 
could suggest or female invention supply, to 
win him to her confidence. He seemed insen- 
sible to the influence of the first, and with- 
stood the wiles of the latter. Finding all her 
efforts in.suf!icient to dissipate the glooms 
which overhung his mind, or to penetrate 
their secret cause, she desisted from further 
attempt and endeavoured to submit to this 
mysterious distress. 

Week after week elapsed and the same 
unknown cause sealed the lips and corroded 
the heart of La Motte. The place of his visi- 
tation in the forest had not been traced. 
Peter had frequently examined round the 
spot where his master disappeared, but had 
never discovered any recess which could be 
supposed to conceal him. The astonishment 
of the servant was at length raised to an in- 
supportable degree, and he communicated to 
his mistress the subject of it. 

The emotion which this information excited 
she disguised from Peter, and reproved him 
for the means he had taken to gratify his 
curiosity. But she revolved this circumstance 
in her thoughts, and, comparing it with the 
late alteration in his temper, her uneasiness 
was renewed and her perplexity considerably 



increased. After much consideration, being 
unable to assign any other motive for his con- 
duct, she began to attribute it to the influence 
of illicit passion ; and her heart, which now 
outran her judgment, confirmed the supposi- 
tion, and roused all the torturing pangs of 
jealousy. 

Comparatively speaking she had never 
known affliction till now ; she had abandoned 
her dearest friends and connections — had 
relinquished the gaieties, the luxuries, and 
almost the necessaries of life — ^fled with her 
family into exile, an exile the most dreary and 
comfortless — experiencing the evils of re<ility 
and those of apprehension united — all these 
she had patiently endured, supported hy the 
affection of him for whose sake she suffered. 
Though that affection indeed had for some 
time appeared to be abated, she had borne its 
decrease with fortitude ; but the last stroke 
of calamity, hitherto withheld, now came with 
irresistible force — the love of which she la- 
mented the loss she now believed was trans- 
ferred to another. 

The operation of strong passion confuses 
the powers of reason, and warps them to its 
own particular direction. Her usual degree 
of judgment, unopposed by the influence of 
her heart, would probably have pointed out to 
Madame La Motte some circumstances upon 
the subject of her distress, equivocal if not 
contradictory to her suspicions. No such 
circumstances appeared to her, and she did 
not long hesitate to decide that Adeline was 
the object of her husband's attachment. Her 
beauty out of the question, who else indeed 
could it be in a spot thus secluded from the 
world ? 

The same cause destroyed, almost at the 
same moment, her only remaining comfort ; 
and when she wept that she could no longer 
look for happiness in the affection of La 
Motte, she wept also that she could no longer 
seek solace in the friendship of Adeline. She 
had too great an esteem for her to doubt at 
first the integrity of her conduct ; but in spite 
of reason, her heart no longer expanded to 
her with its usual warmth of kindness. She 
shrunk from her confidence ; and, as the secret 
broodings of jealousy cherished her suspi- 
cions, she became less kind to her, even in 
manner. 

Adeline, observing the change, at first 
attributed it to accident, and afterwards to a 
temporary displeasure, arising from some 
little inadvertency in her conduct. She there- 
fore increased her assiduities ; but perceiving, 
contrary to all expectation, that her efforts to 
please failed of their usual consequence, and 
that the reserve of Madame's manner rather 
increased than abated, she became seriously 
uneasy, and resolved to seek an explanation. 
This Madame La Motte as sedulously avoided, 
and was for some time able to prevent. 
Adeline, however, loo mMcVv. VoXst^Vt^wv^^ 



24 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 

event to yield to delicate scruples, pressed blamed for it by those whom he would save 

the subject so closely that Madame was at from the pain of sharing it?" 

first agitated and confused, but at length Having uttered these words, he quitted the 
invented some idle excuse, and laughed off room, leaving Madame La Motte lost in sur- 

the affair. prise, but somewhat relieved from the pressure 

She now saw the necessity of subduing all of her former suspicions. Still, however, she 
appearance of reserve towards Adeline ; and pursued Adeline with an eye of scrutiny ; 
though her heart could not conquer the pre- and the mask of kindness would sometimes 
judices of p>assion, it taught her to assume, fall ofif, and discover the features of distrust, 
with tolerable success, the aspect of kindness. Adeline, without exactly knowing why, felt 
Adeline was deceived, and was again at less at ease and less happy in her presence 
peace. Indeed, confidence in the sincerity than formerly ; her spirits drooped, and she 
and goodness of others was her weakness, would often, when alone, weep at the forlorn- 
But the pangs of stifled jealousy struck deeper ness of her condition. Formerly, her remem- 
to the heart of Madame La Motte, and she brance of past sufferings was lost in the friend- 
resolved at all events to obtain some certainty ship of Madame La Motte ; now, though her 
upon the subject of her suspicions. behaviour was too guarded to betray any 

She now condescended to an act of mean- striking instance of unkindness, there was 
ness which she had before despised, and something in her manner which chilled the 

ordered Peter to watch the steps of his master, hopes of Adeline, unable as she was to anar- 

in order to discover, if possible, the place of lyse it. But a circumstance which soon 

his visitation. So much did passion win upon occurred, suspended, for awhile, the jealousy 

her judgment by time and indulgence, that of Madame La Motte, and roused her hus- 

she sometimes ventured even to doubt the band from his state of gloomy stupefaction, 

integrity of Adeline, and afterwards proceeded Peter, having been one day to Auboine 

to believe it possible that the object of La for the weekly supply of provisions, returned 

Motte's rambles might be an assignation with with intelligence that awakened in La Motte 

her. What suggested this conjecture was new apprehension and anxiety, 

that Adeline frequently took long walks alone "Oh, sir! I've heard something that has 

in the forest, and sometimes was absent from astonished me, as well it may," cried Peter; 

the abbey for many hours. This circumstance, " and so it will you when you come to know 

which Madame La Motte had at first attri- it. As I was standing in the blacksmith's 

buted to Adeline's fondness for the picturesque shop, while the smith was driving a nail into 

beauties of nature, now operated forcibly the horse's shoe (by-the-bye, the horse lost it 

upon her imagination, and she could view it in an odd way, I'll teU you, sir, how it 

in no other light than as affording an op- was) " 

portunity for secret conversation with her ' ' Nay, prithee, leave it till another time, 

husband. and go on with your story." 

Peter obeyed the orders of his mistress "Why, then, sir, as I was standing in the 

with alacrity, for they were warmly seconded blacksmith's shop, comes in a man with a 

by his own curiosity. All his endeavours pipe in his mouth, and a large pouch of to- 

were, however, fruitless ; he never dared to bacco in his hand " 

follow La Motte near enough to observe the * ' Well — what has the pipe to do with the 

place of his last retreat. Her impatience, story?" 

thus heightened by delay, and her passions ' ' Nay, sir, you put me out ; I can't go on, 

stimulated by difficulty, Madame La Motte unless you let me tell it my own way. As I 

now resolved to apply to her husband for an was saying — with a pipe in his mouth — I 

explanation of his conduct. think I'was there, your honour?" 

After some consideration concerning the "Yes, yes." 

manner most likely to succeed with him, she " He sets himself down on the bench, and, 

went to La Motte, but when she entered the taking the pipe from his mouth, says to the 

room where he sat, forgetting all her con- blacksmith: 'Neighbour, do you know any- 

certed address, she fell at his feet, and was body of the name of La Motte hereabouts?' 

for some moments lost in tears. Surprised Bless your honour, I turned all of a cold 

at her attitude and distress, he inquired the sweat in a minute ! — Is not your honoiu: well, 

occasion of it, and was answered that it was shall I fetch you anything?' 

caused by his own conduct. " No — but be brief in yoiu* nan-ative." * 

" My conduct ! What part of it, pray?" " 'La Motte ! La Motte !' said the black- 
inquired he. smith, ' I think I've heard the name.' 'Have 

"Your reserve, your secret sorrow, and you?' said I; 'you're cunning then, for there's 

frequent absence from the abbey." no such person hereabouts to my knowledge.'" 

"Is it then so wonderful that a man, who " Fool ! — why did you say that ? " 

has lost almost everything, should sometimes "Because I did not want them to know 

lament his misfortunes? or so criminal to your honour was here ; and if I had not 

attempt concealing bis grief that he must be managed very cleverly, they would have 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 25 

found me out. 'There is no such person "Rut whither can wc fly?" said Madame 
hereabouts, to my knowledge,' says I. Ila Motte, scarcely al^le to support herself. 
'Indeed!' says the blacksmith, 'you know "Anywhere!" said he, "to stay hrre is 
more of the neighbourhood than I do then.' certain destruction. We must take rcfni^o in 

" 'A3re,' savs the man with the pipe, 'that's Switzerland, I think. If any part of France 
very true. Jtow came you to know so much would have concealed me, surely it had been 
of the neighbourhood? I came here twenty- this I" 

six years ago, come next St. Michael, and you "Alas, how we are persecuted ! " rejoined 
know more than I do. How came you to Madame. "This spot is scarcely made con- 
know so much ? ' fortable, before we are obliged to leave it, and 

" With that he put his pipe in his mouth, go we know not whither." 
and gave a whifif full in my face. Lord 1 "I wish we may not know whither," re- 
your honour, I trembled from head to foot, plied La Motte ; "that is the least evil that 
'Nay, as for that matter, 'says I, 'Idon'tknow threatens us. Let us esca]3e a prison, and I 
more than other people ; but I'm sure I never care not whither we go. But return to the 
heard of such a man as that.' ' Pray,' says abbeyimniediately, and pack up what movables 
the blacksmith, staring me full in the face, you can." 

' ain't you the man that was inquiring some A flood of tears came to the relief of 
time since about St. Clair's Abbey?' ' Well, Madame La Motte, and she hung upon Aflc- 
what of thsU?' says I; 'what does that line's arm, silent and trembling. Adeline, 
prove?' 'Why, they say somebody lives in though she had no comfort to bestow, endea- 
the abbey now,' said the man, turning to the voured to command her feelings and appear 
other ; ' and for aught I know, it may be this composed, 
same La Motte.' " Come," said La Motte, " we waste time ; 

" 'Aye, for aught I know either,' says the let us lament hereafter, but at present prepare 
man with the pipe, getting up from the bench, for flight. Exert a little of that fortitude 
' and you know more of this than you'll own. which is so necessary for our preservation. 
I'll lay my life on't, this Monsieur La Motte Adeline does not weep, yet her state is as 
lives at the abbey.' 'Aye,' says I, 'you are wretched as your own, for I know not how 
out there, for he does not live at the abbey long I shall be able to protect her." 
aow.'" Notwithstanding her terror, this reproof 

"Confound your folly !" cried La Motte ; touched the pride of Madame I^ Motte, who 
"but be quick — how did the matter dried her tears, but disdained to reply, and 
end ? " looked at Adeline with a strong expression of 

"* My master does not live there now, ' said displeasure. As they moved silently toward 
I. 'Oh, oh! ' said the man with the pipe, the abbey, Adeline asked La Motte if he was 
• he is your master, then ? And pray how long sure they were the King's officers who in- 
has he left the abbey — and where does he live quired for him. 
now?* "I cannot doubt it," he replied; "who 

" * Hold,' said I, ' not so fast — I know when else could possibly inquire for me ? Besides, 
to speak and when to hold my tongue — but the behaviour of the man who mentioned my 
who has been inquiring for him?' name puts the. matter beyond a question." 

" 'What ! he expected somebody to inquire " Perhaps not," said Madame La Motte ; 
for him,' says the man. ' No,' says I, 'he " let us wait till morning ere we setoff. We 
did not ; but if he did, what does that prove? may then find it will be unnecessary to go." 
— that argues nothing.' With that he looked "We may, indeed: the King's officers 
at the blacksmith, and they went out of the would probably by that time have told us as 
shop together, leaving my horse's shoe un- much." La Motte went to give orders to 
done. But I never minded that, for the Peter. 

moment they were gone, I mounted and rode " Set off in an hour !" said Peter. " I^ord 
away as fast as I could. But in my fright, bless you, master ! only consider the coacli- 
your honour, I forgot to take the roundabout wheel : it would take me a day at least to 
way, and so came straight home." mend it, for your honour knows I never 

La Motte, extremely shocked at Peter's in- mended one in my life." 
telligence, made no other reply than by cur- This was a circunistnnce which La Motte 
sing his folly, and immediately went in search had entirely overlooked. When they settled 
of Madame, who was walking with Adeline on at tlie abbey, Peter had at first been too busy 
the banks of the river. La Motte was too in repairing the apartments to remember the 
much agitated to soften his information by carriage, and afterwards, believing it would 
preface: "We are discovered!" said he, not quickly be wanted, he had neglected to do 
" the King's officers have been inquiring for it. La Motte's temper now entirely forsook 
me at Auboine, and Peter has blundered upon him, and with many execrations he ordered 
my ruin I " He then informed her of what Peter to go to work immediately ; but on 
Peter had related, and bade her prepare to searching for the materials formerly bought, 
quit the abbey. they were nowhere to b^ iovixi!^, ^xA'^^v^x ^ 



26 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



length remembered, though he was prudent 
enough to conceal this circumstance, that he 
had used the nails in repairing the abbey. 

It was now therefore impossible to quit the 
forest that night, and La Motte had only to 
consider the most probable plan of conceal- 
ment, should the officers of justice visit the 
ruin before the morning, a circumstance which 
the thoughtlessness of Peter, in returning from 
Auboine by the straight way, made not im- 
likely. 

At first, indeed, it occurred to him that 
though his family could not be removed, he 
might himself take one of the horses and 
escape from the forest before night. But he 
thought there would still be some danger of 
detection in the towns through which he must 
pass, and he could not well bear the idea of 
leaving his family unprotected, without know- 
ing when he could return to them or whither 
he could direct them to follow him. I-a 
Motte was not a man of very vigorous resolu- 
tion, and he was, perhaps, rather more wil- 
ling to suffer in company than alone. 

After much consideration, he recollected 
the trap-door of the closet belonging to the 
chambers above ; it was invisible to the eye, 
and, whatever might be its direction, it would 
securely shelter him, at least, from discovery. 
Having deliberated further upon the subject, 
he determined to explore the recess to which 
the stairs led, and thought it possible that, 
for a short time, his whole family might be 
concealed within it. There was little time 
between the suggestion of the plan and the 
execution of his purpose, for darkness was 
spreading around, and, in every murmur of 
the wind, he thought he heard the voices of 
his enemies. 

He called for a light and ascended alone to 
the chamber. When he came to the closet, 
it was some time before he could find the 
trap-door, so exactly did it correspond with 
the boards of the floor. At length he found 
and raised it. The chill damps of long-con- 
fined air rushed from the aperture, and he 
paused for a moment to let them pass ere he 
descended. As he stood looking down the 
abyss, he recollected the report which Peter 
had brought concerning the abbey, and it 
gave him an uneasy sensation ; but this soon 
yielded to more pressing interests. 

The stairs were steep, and in many places 
trembled beneath his weight. 

Having continued to descend for some 
time, his feet touched the ground, and he found 
himself in a narrow passage ; but as he 
turned to pursue it, the damp vapours curled 
around him and extinguished the light. He 
called aloud for Peter, but could make 
nobody hear, and, after some time, endea- 
voured to find his way up the stairs. In this, 
with difficulty, he succeeded, and, passing the 
chambers with cautious steps, descended the 
toyfCT. 



The security which the place he had just 
quitted seemed to promise was of too mudi 
importance to be slightly rejected, and he de- 
termined immediately to make another ex- 
periment with the light ; having now fixed it 
in a lantern, he descended a second time to 
the passage. The current of vapours occa- 
sioned by the opening of the trap-door was 
abated, and the fresh air thence admitted 
had begim to circulate ; La Motte i>assed on 
unmolested. 

The passage was of considerable length, 
and led him to a door, which was fastened. 
He placed the lantern at some distance to 
avoid the current of air, and applied his 
strength to the door ; it shook under his 
hand, but did not yield. Upon examining it 
more closely he perceived the wood round 
the lock was decayed, probably by the 
damps, and this encouraged him to proceed. 
After some time it gave way to his effort, and 
he found himself in a square stone room. 

He stood for some time to survey it. The 
walls which were dripping with tmwholesome 
dews, were entirely bare, and afforded not 
even a window. A small iron grate alone 
admitted the air. At the farther end, near a 
low recess, was another door. La Motte 
went towards it, and as he passed looked 
into the recess. Upon the ground within it 
stood a large chest, which he went forward 
to examine, and lifting the lid he saw the 
remains of a human skeleton. Horror 
struck upon his heart, and he involuntarii}r 
stepped back. Durii^ a pause of some 
moments his first emotions subsided. That 
thrilling curiosity which objects of terror 
often excite in the human mind, impelled 
him to take a second view of this dismal 
spectacle. 

La Motte stood motionless as he gazed ; 
the object before him seemed to confirm the 
report that some person had formerly been 
murdered in the abbey. At length he closed 
the chest, and advanced to the second door, 
which also was fastened, but the key was in 
the lock. He turned it with difficulty, and 
then found the door was held by two strongf 
bolts. Having undrawn these, it disclosed 
a flight of steps, which he descended : they 
terminated in a chain of low vaults, or rather 
cells that, from the manner of their con- 
struction and present condition, seemed to 
have been coeval with the most ancient parts 
of the abbey. La Motte, in his then de- 
pressed state of mind, thought them the 
burial-places of the monks who formerly 
inhabited the pile above ; but they were more 
calculated for places of penance for the 
living than of rest for th6 dead. 

Having reached the extremity of these 
cells, the way was again closed by a door. 
La Motte now hesitated whether he should 
attempt to proceed any farther. The present 
spot seemed to afford the security he sought. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



2/ 



Here he nught pass the night unmolested by- 
apprehension of discovery, and it was most 
probable that if the officers arrived in the 
night and fpund the abbey vacated, they 
would quit it before morning, or at least 
before he could have any occasion to emerge 
from concealment. These considerations 
restored his mind to a state of greater com- 
posure. His only immediate care was to 
bring his family as soon as possible to this 
place of security, lest the officers should come 
unawares upon them ; and while he stood 
thus musing he blamed himself for delay. 

But an irresistible desire of knowing to 
what this door led arrested his steps, and he 
turned to open it ; the door, however, was 
fastened, and as he attempted to force it, he 
suddenly thought he heard a noise above. It 
now occurred to him that the officers might 
already have arrived, and he quitted the cells 
with precipitation, intending to listen at the 
trap-door. 

'* There," said he, " I may wait in security, 
and perhaps hear something of what passes. 
My family will not be known, or at least not 
hurt, and their uneasiness on my account 
they must learn to endure." 

Th^e were the arguments of La Motte, in 
which, it must be owned, selfish prudence 
was more conspicuous than tender anxiety 
for his wife. He had by this time reached 
the bottom of the stairs, when, on looking up 
he perceived the trap-door was left open, and 
ascending in haste to close it, he heard foot- 
steps advancing through the chambers above. 
Before he could descend entirely out of sight 
he again looked up, and perceived through 
the aperture the face of a man looking down 
upon him. 

** Master ! " cried Peter. 
La Motte was somewhat relieved at the 
sound of his voice, though angry that he 
had occasioned him so much terror. 

"What brings you here, and what is the 
matter below ? " 

** Nothing, sir, nothing's the matter ; only 
my mistress sent me to see after your 
honour." 

"There's nobody there then?" said La 
Motte, setting his foot upon the step. 

* ' Yes, sir, there is my mistress and 

Mademoiselle Adeline " 

" WeU— well," said La Motte, briskly, "go 
your ways, I am coming." 

He informed Madame La Motte where he 
bad been and of his intention to secrete 
himself, and deliberated upon the means of 
convincing the officers, should they arrive, 
that he had quitted the abbey. For this 
purpose he ordered all the movable furniture 
to be conveyed to the cells below. La Motte 
himself assisted in the business, and every 
hand was employed for despatch. In a very 
short time the habitable part of the fabric 
was left almost as desolate as he had found it. 



He then bade Peter take the horses to a distance 
from the abbey, and turn them loose. After 
further consideration, he thought it might 
contribute to mislead the officers if he placed 
in some conspicuous part of the fabric an in- 
scription, signifying his condition, and men- 
tioning the date of his departure from the 
abbey. Over the door of the tower, which led 
to the habitable part of the structure, he 
therefore cut the followmg lines : — 

Oh ye whom misfortune may lead to this spot, 
Learn that there are others as miserable as your- 
selves. 
P...L...M...,a wretched exile, sought 
within these walls a refuge from persecution on the 
27th of April, 1658, and quitted them on the lath of 
July in the same year, in search of a more conve- 
nient asylum. 

After engraving these words with a knife, the 
small stock of provisions remaining from the 
week's supply (for Peter, in his fright, had re- 
turned unloaded from his last journey) was 
put into a basket, and La Motte having as- 
sembled his family, they all ascended the 
stairs of the tower, and passed through the 
chambers to the closet. Peter went first with 
a light, and with some difficulty found the 
trap-door. Madame I-a Motte shuddered as 
she surveyed the gloomy abyss ; but they were 
all silent. 

La Motte now took the light and led the 
way ; Madame followed, and then Adeline. 

"These old monks loved good wine, as 
well as other people," said Peter, who 
brought up the rear; "I warrant, your 
honour, now, this was their cellar ; I smell 
the casks already." 

"Peace," said La Motte; "reserve your 
jokes for a proper occasion." 

" There is no harm in loving good wine, as 
your honour knows." 

" Have done with this buffoonery," said 
La Motte, in a tone more authoritative, " and 
go first." Peter obeyed. 

They came to the vaulted room. The 
dismal spectacle he had seen here deterred 
La Motte from passing the night in this 
chamber ; and the furniture had, by his own 
order, been conveyed to the cells below. 
He was anxious that his family should not 
perceive the skeleton — an object which would 
probably excite a degree of horror not to be 
overcome during their stay. La Motte now 
passed the chest in haste, and Madame La 
Motte and Adeline were too much engrossed 
by their own thoughts to give minute atten- 
tion to external circumstances. 

When they reached the cells Madame La 
Motte wept at the necessity which condemned 
her to a spot so dismal. "Alas," said she, 
' ' are we indeed thus reduced ! The apart- 
ments above formerly appeared to me a de- 
plorable habitation, but they are a palace 
compared to these." 

"True, my dear," sa\d Vat^QVu<i\ "" ^t»s^ 



28 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



let the remembrance of what you once thought 
them soothe your discontent now ; these cells 
arc also a palace compared to the Biciitre or 
the Bastille, and to the terrors of further pun- 
ishment which would accompany them. I-^t 
the apprehension of the greater evil teach you 
to endure the less, I am contented if we 
find here the refuge I seek." 

Madame La Motte was silent, and Adeline, 
forgetting her late unkindness, endeavoured 
as much as she could to console her ; while 
her heart was sinking with the misfortunes 
which she could not but anticipate, she appeared 
composed and even cheerful. She attended 
Madame La Motte with the most watchful 
solicitude, and felt so thankful that La Motte 
was now secreted within this recess that she 
almost lost all perception of its glooms and 
inconveniences. 

This she artlessly expressed to him who 
■could not be insensible to the tenderness it 
discovered. Madame La Motte was also 
sensible of it, and it renewed a painful sensa- 
tion. The effusions of gratitude she mistook 
for those of tenderness. 

La Motte returned frequently to the trap- 
door to listen if anybody was in the abbey ; 
but no sound disturbed the stillness of night ; 
at length they sat down to supper — the repast 
was a melancholy one. 

" If the officers do not come hither 
to-night," said Madame La Motte, sighing, 
"suppose, my dear, Peter returns to Auboine 
to-morrow ; he may there learn something 
more of this affair ; or at least he might pro- 
cure a carriage to convey us hence." 

"To be sure he might," said La Motte 
peevishly, "and people to attend it also. 
Peter would be an excellent person to show 
the officers the way to the abbey, and to 
inform them of what they might else be in doubt 
about — my concealment here." 

" How cruel is this irony ! " replied Madame 
La Motte ; " I proposed only what I thought 
would be for our mutual good ; my judgment 
was perhaps wrong, but my intention was 
certainly right." 

Tears welled into her eyes as she spoke 
these words. Adeline wished to console 
her ; but delicacy kept her silent. La Motte 
observed the effect of his speech, and some- 
thing like remorse touched his heart. He ap- 
proached, and, taking his wife's hand, " You 
must allow for the perturbation of my mind," 
said he ; "I did not mean to afflict you thus. 
The idea of sending Peter to Auboine, where 
he has already done so much harm by his 
blunders, teased me, and I could not let it 
pass unnoticed. No, my dear, our only 
chance of safety is to remain where we are 
while our provisions last. If the officers do 
not come here to-night, they probably will 
to-morrow ; or perhaps the next day. When 
they have searched the abbey without finding 
me they will depart ; we may then emerge 



from this recess and take measures for re- 
moving to a distant country." 

Madame La Motte acknowledged the just- 
ness of his remarks, and her mind being relieved 
by the little apology he had made, she became 
tolerably cheerful. Supper being ended. La 
Motte stationed the faithful though simple 
Peter at the foot of the steps that ascended to 
the closet, there to keep watch during the 
night. Having done this he returned to the 
lower cells, where he had left his little family. 
The beds were spread, and having mournfully 
bade each other good-night, they lay down 
and implored rest. 

Adeline's thoughts were too busy to suffer 
her to repose, and when she believed 'her 
companions were sunk in slumber, she in- 
dulged the sorrow which reflection brought. 
She also looked forward to the future with the 
most mournful apprehension. 

Should La Motte be seized, what was to 
become of her ? She would then be a i^-an- 
derer in the wide world ; without friends to 
protect or money to support her; the pros- 
pect was gloomy — ^was terrible I 

She surveyed it and shuddered ! The dis- 
tresses too of Monsieur and Madame La 
Motte, whom she loved with the most lively 
<iffcction, formed no inconsiderable part oif 
hers. 

Sometimes she looked back to her father. 
but in him she only saw an enemy from whom 
she must fly. This remembrance heightened 
her sorrow ; yet it was not the recollection of 
the suffering he had occasioned her by which 
she was so much affiicted, as by the sense <rf 
his unkindness ; she wept bitterly. .\t length, 
with that artless piety which innocence only 
knows, slie addressed the Supreme Being, and 
resigned herself to His care. Her mind then 
gradually became peaceful and reassured« and 
soon after she sunk to repose. 



CHAPTER V. 
A SURPRISE — AN ADVENTtJRE— A MYSTERY". 

Thi-: night passed without any alarm ; Peter 
had remained upon his post and heard nothing 
that prevented his sleeping. La Motte heard 
him (long before he saw him) most musically 
snoring ; though it must be owned there was 
more of the bass than of any other part of the 
gamut in his performance. He was soon 
roused by the dravura of La Motte, whose 
notes sounded discord to his ears and de- 
stroyed the torpor of his tranquillity. 

' ' God bless you, master, what's the matter?" 
cried Peter, waking ; " are they come? " 

' ' Yes, for aught you care, they might be 
come. Did I place you here to sleep, 
sirrah ? " 

" Bless you, master," returned Peter, 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



2^ 



*' sleep is the only comfort to be had here; 
I'm sure I would not deny it to a dog in such 
a place as this." 

La Motte sternly questioned him concern- 
ing any noise he might have heard in the 
night, and Peter full as solemnly protested he 
had beard none — an assertion which was 
strictly true, for he had enjoyed the comfort 
of being asleep the whole time. 

La Motte then ascended to the trap-door 
and listened attentively. No sounds were 
heard, and, as he ventured to lift it, the full 
light of the Sim burst upon his sight, the 
morning being now far advanced. He walked 
softly along the chambers and looked through 
a window ; no person was to be seen. En- 
couraged by his apparent security, he ven- 
tured down the stairs of the tower, and en- 
tered the first apartment. He was proceeding 
towards the second, when, suddenly recollect- 
ing himself, he first peeped through the cre- 
vice of the door, which stood half open. He 
looked, and distinctly saw a person sitting 
near the window, upon which his arm rested. 

The discovery so much shocked him that 
for a moment he lost all presence of mind, 
and was utterly unable to move from the 
spot. The person, whose back was towards 
Imm, arose and turned his head. La Motte 
now recovered himself, and quitting the apart- 
ment as quickly, and, at the same time, as 
silently as possible, ascended to the closet. 
• He raised the trap-door, but, before he closed 
it, heard the footsteps of a person entering the 
outer chamber. Bolts or other fastening to 
the trap there were none; and his security 
depended solely upon the exact correspond- 
ence of the boards. The outer door of the 
stone room had no means of defence ; and 
the fastenings of the inner one were on the 
wrong side to afford him security even till 
some means of escape could be found. 

When he reached this room he paused, and 
heard distinctly persons walking in the closet 
above. While he was listening he heard a 
voice call him by name, and he instantly filed 
to the cells below, expecting every moment to 
hear the trap lifted and the footsteps of pur- 
suit ; but he was fled beyond the reach of 
hearing either. Having thrown himself on 
the ground at the farthest extremity of the 
vaults, he lay for some time breathless with 
agitation. Madame La Motte and Adeline, in 
the utmost terror, inquired what had hap- 
pened. It was some time before he could 
speak ; when he did it was almost unneces- 
sary, for the distant noises, which sounded 
from above, informed the family of a part of 
the truth. 

The sounds did not seem to approach, but 
Madame La Motte, unable to command her 
terror, shrieked aloud. This redoubled the 
distress of La Motte. 

•'You have destroyed me 1" cried he; 
"that shriek has informed them where I am." 



He traversed the cells with clasped hands and 
quick steps. Adeline stood pale and still a.H 
death, supporting Madame La Motte, wlioni 
with difficulty she prevented from fainting. 

"Oh, Dupras ! Dupras ! you are already 
avenged ! " said he, in a voice that seemed to 
burst from his heart. There was a pause of 
silence. " But why should I deceive m>'self 
with a hope of escaping?" he resumed; 
" why do I wait here for their coming? Let 
mc rather end these torturing pangs by 
throwing myself into their hands at once." 

As he spoke he moved towards the door, 
but the distress of Madame La Motte arrested 
his steps. "Stay," said she, "for my sake, 
stay ; do not leave mc thus, nor throw your- 
self voluntarily upon destruction !" 

"Surely, sir," said Adeline, "you are too 
precipitate ; this despair is useless, as it is ill- 
founded. We hear no p)erson approaching. 
If the officers had discovered the trap-door 
they would certainly have been here before 
now." 

The words of Adeline stilled the tumult of 
his mind ; the agitation of terror subsided, 
and reason beamed a feeble ray upon his 
hopes. He listened attentively, and per- 
ceiving that all was silent, advanced with 
caution to the stone room, and thence to the 
foot of the stairs that led to the trap-door. It 
was closed ; no sound was heard above. 

He watched a long time, and, the silence 
continuing, his hopes strengthened, and at 
length he began to believe that the officers 
had quitted the abbey ; the day, however, 
was spent in anxious watchfulness. He did 
not dare to unclose the trap-door ; and he 
frequently thought he heard distant noises. 
It was evident, however, that the secret of 
the closet had escaped discovery, and on this 
circumstance he justly founded his security. 
The following night was passed, like the day, 
in trembling hope and incessant watching. 

But the necessities of hunger now threatened 
them. The provisions, which had been dis- 
tributed with the nicest economy, were nearly 
exhausted, and the most deplorable conse- 
quences might be expected from their remain- 
ing longer in concealment. Thus circum- 
stanced, La Motte deliberated upon the most 
prudent method of proceeding. There ap- 
peared no other alternative than to send Peter 
to Auboine, the only town from which he 
could return within the time prescribed by 
their necessities. There was game, indeed, 
in the forest ; but Peter could neither handle 
a gun or use a fishing-rod to any advantage. 

It was therefore agreed that he should go 
to Auboine for a supply of provisions, and at 
the same time bring materials for mending the 
coach-wheel, that they might have some ready 
conveyance from the forest. La Motte for- 
bade Peter to ask any questions concermng 
the people who had inquired for him, or take 
any methods for discoveivw^ ^^Yi'txickSt >ic«>j 



30 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



liad quitted the country, lest his blunders 
should again Ixjtray him. He ordered him to 
be entirely silent as to these subjects, and to 
finish his business and leave the place with all 
possible despatch. 

A difficulty yet remained to be overcome — 
who should first venture abroad into the 
abbey, to learn whether it was vacated by the 
officers of justice? La Motte considered 
that if he was again seen he should be 
effectually betrayed, which could not be so 
certain, if one of his family was observed, 
for they were each unknown to the officers. 
It was necessary, however, that the person he 
sent should have courage enough to go 
through with the inquiry, and wit enough to 
conduct it with cautic n. Peter, perhaps, 
had the first ; but was certainly destitute of 
the last. Annette had neither. La Motte 
looked at his wife, and asked her if, for his 
sake, she dared to venture. Her heart shrunk 
from the proposal, yet she was unwilling to 
refuse, or appear indifferent upon a point so 
essential to the safety of her husband. 
Adeline observed in her countenance the 
agitation of her mind, and, surmounting the 
fears which had hitherto kept her silent, she 
offered herself to go. 

"They will be less likely to offend me," 
said she, "than a man." Shame would not 
suffer L:i Motte to accept hur offer; and 
Madame, touched by the magnanimity of her 
conduct, felt a momentary renewal of all her 
iormer kindness. Adeline pressed her pro- 
posal so warmly, and seemed so much in 
earnest, that La Motte began to hesitate. 
"You, sir," said she, "once preserved me 
from the most imminent danger, and your 
kindness has since protected me. Do not 
refuse me the satisfaction of deserving your 
goodness by a grateful return of it. Let me 
go into the abbey, and if, by so doing, I 
should preserve you from evil, I shall be 
sufficiently rewarded for what little danger I 
may incur, for my pleasure will be at least 
equal to yours." 

Madame La Motte could scarcely refrain 
from tears as Adeline spoke ; and La Motte, 
sighing deeply, said, "Well, be it so; go, 
Adeline, and from this moment consider me 
as your debtor." Adeline stayed not to reply, 
but taking a light quitted the cells. La Motte 
following to raise the trap-door, and caution- 
ing her to look, if possible, into every apart- 
ment before she entered it. "If you should 
be seen," he said, "you must account for 
your appearance so as not to discover me. 
Your own presence of mind may assist you, I 
cannot — God bless you I " 

When she was gone, Madame La Motte's 
admiration of her conduct began to yield to 
other emotions. Distrust gradually under- 
mined kindness, and jealousy raised sus- 
picions. "It must be a sentiment more 
ipowerfu] than gratitude, " thought she, ' ' that 



could teach Adeline to subdue her fears. 
What, but love, could influence her to a 
conduct so generous ! " Madame La Motte, 
when she found it impossible to account for 
Adeline's conduct without alleging some in* 
terested motive for it, however her suspicions 
might agree with the practice of the world, 
had surely forgotten how much she once 
admired the purity and disinterestedness of 
her young friend. 

Adeline meanwhile ascended tq the 
chambers ; the cheerful beams of the sun 
played once more upon her sight, and re- 
animated her spirits ; she walked lightly 
through the apartments, nor stopped till she 
came to the stairs of the tower. Here she 
stood for some time, but no sounds met her 
ear, save the sighing of the wind among the ■ 
trees, and at length she descended. She 
passed the apartments below without seeing 
any person, and the little furniture that re- 
mained seemed to stand exactly as she had 
left it. She now ventured to look out firora 
the tower ; the only animate objects that ap- 
peared were the deer quietly grazing under 
the shade of the woods. Her favourite little 
fawn distinguished Adeline, and came bound- 
ing towards her with strong marks of joy. 
She was alarmed lest the animal, being 
observed, should betray her, and walked 
swiftly away through the cloisters. 

She opened the door that led to the great 
hall of the abbey, but the passage was so 
gloomy and dark that she feared to enter it, 
and started back. It was necessary, however, 
that she should examine farther, particularly 
on the opposite side of the ruin, of whicn 
she had hitherto had no view ; but her fears 
returned when she recollected how far it 
would lead her from her only place of refuge, 
and how difficult it would be to retreat. She 
hesitated what to do ; but when she recol- 
lected her obligations to La Motte, and 
considered this as perhaps her only oppor- 
tunity of doing him a service, she determined 
to proceed. 

As these thoughts passed rapidly over her 
mind, she raised her innocent looks to 
Heaven, and breathed a silent prayer. With 
trembling steps she proceeded over fragments 
of the ruin, looking anxiously around, and 
often starting as the breeze rustled among 
the trees, mistaking it for the whisperings of 
men. She came to the lawn which fronted 
the fabric, but no person was to be seen, and 
her spirits revived. The great door of the 
hall she now endeavoured to open, but sud- 
denly remembering that it was fastened by 
La Motto's orders, she proceeded to the 
north end of the abbey, and, having siu:- 
veyed the prospect around, as far as the 
thick foliage of the trees would permit, 
without perceiving any person, she turned 
her steps to the tower from which she had 
issued. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



31 



Adeline was now Hght of heart, and relumed 
-with impatience to. inform La Motte of his 
security. In the cloisters she was again met 
by her little favourite, and she stopped for a 
moment to caress it. The fawn seemed sen- 
sible to the sound of her voice, and discovered 
new ]oy ; but while she spoke, it suddenly 
started from her hand, and looking up, she 
perceived the door of the passage, leading to 
the great hall, open, and a man in the habit 
of a soldier issue forth. 

With the swiftness of an arrow she fled 
along the cloisters, nor once ventured to look 
back ; but a voice called to her to stop, and 
she heard steps advancing quick in pursuit. 
BefcHne she oonld reach the tower, her breath 
failed her, and she leaned against a pillar of 
the cloister, pale and exhausted. The man 
came up, and gazing at her with a strong ex- 
pression of surprise and curiosity, he assumed 
a gentle manner, assured her she had nothing 
to fear, and inquired if she belonged to La 
Motte : observing that she still looked terrified 
and remained silent, he repeated his assur- 
ances and his question. 

**I know that he is concealed within the 
ruin," said the stranger; "the occasion of 
his concealment I also know ; but it is of the 
utmost importance I should see him, and he 
>vill then be convinced that he has nothing to 
fear from me." 

Adeline trembled so excessively, that it was 
■with difficulty she could support herself— she 
hesitated, and knew not what to reply. Her 
manner seemed to confirm the suspicions of 
tiie stranger, and her consciousness of this 
increased her embarrassment ; he took ad- 
vantage of it to press her farther. Adeline 
£^ length replied that "La Motte had some 
time since resided at the abbey." 

* ' And does still, madam, ' ' said the stranger ; 
*' lead me to where he may be found — I must 
see him, and " 

"Never, sir," replied Adeline; "and I 
solenmly assure you it will be in vain to search 
for him." 

"That I must try," resumed he, "since 
you, madam, will not assist me. I have 
already followed him to some chambers above, 
where I suddenly lost him ; thereabouts he 
must be concealed, and it's plain, therefore, 
they afford some secret passage." 

Without waiting Adeline's reply, he sprung 
to the door of the tower. She now thought 
it would betray a consciousness of the truth 
of his conjecture to follow him, and resolved 
to remain below. But, on farther consider- 
ation, it occurred to her, that he might steal 
silently into the closet, and possibly surprise 
La Motte at the door of the trap. She there- 
fore hastened after him, that her voice might 
prevent the danger she apprehended. He 
was already in the second chamber when she 
overtook him ; she immediately began to 
speak aloud. 



This room he searched wth the most scru- 
pulous care, but finding no private door or 
other outlet he proceeded to the closet ; then 
it was that it required all her fortitude to con- 
ceal her agitation. He continued the search. 
"Within these chambers I know he is con- 
cealed," said he, "though hitherto I have 
not been able to discover how. It was hither 
I followed a man, whom I believe to l)c him, 
and he could not escape without a passage ; 
I shall not quit the place till I have found it." 

He examined the walls and the boards, but 
without discovering the division of the floor, 
which, indeed, so exactly corresponded, that 
La Motte himself had not perceived it by the 
eye, but by the trembling of the floor beneath 
his feet. " Here is some mystery," said the 
stranger, "which I cannot comprehend, and 
perhaps never shall." He was turning to 
quit the closet, when, who can paint the dis- 
tress of Adeline, upon seeing the trap-door 
gently raised, and La Motte himself appear. 
"Hah I" cried the stranger, advancing 
eagerly to him. La Motte sprang forward, 
and they were locked in each other s arms. 

The astonishment of Adeline for a moment 
surpassed even her former distress ; but a 
remembrance darted across her mind which 
explained the present scene, and, before La 
Motte could exclaim, " My son ! " she knew 
the stranger as such. Peter, who stood at 
the foot of the stairs and heard what passed 
above, flew to acquaint his mistress with tlie 
joyful discovery, and in a few moments she 
was folded in the embrace of her son. This 
spot, so lately the mansion of despair, seemed 
metamorphosed into the palace of pleasure, 
and the walls echoed only to the accents of 
joy and congratulation. 

The joy of Peter on this occasion was be- 
yond expression : he acted a perfect panto- 
mime — he capered about, clapped his hands 
— ran to his young master — shook him by the 
hand, in spite of the frowns of La Motte ; 
ran ever)rwhere without knowing for what, 
and gave no rational answer to anything that 
was said to him. 

After their first emotions were subsided, La 
Motte, as if suddenly recollecting himself, 
resumed his wonted solemnity : "I am to 
blame," said he, "thus to give way to joy, 
when I am still perhaps surrounded by danger. 
Let us secure a retreat while it is yet in our 
power," continued he; "in a few hours the 
King's officers may search for me again." 

Louis comprehended his father's words, 
and immediately relieved his apprehensions 
by the following relation : 

"A letter from Monsieur Nemours, con- 
taining an account of your flight from Paris, 
reached me at Peronne, where I was then 
upon duty with my regiment. He mentioned 
that you were gone towards the south of 
France, but as he had not slue^ ^^a-ax^ 
from you, be was \g,ivoiaox ol NJaa ^^^ ^"^ 



32 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



your refuge. It was about this time that I 
Avas despatched into Flanders ; and being un- 
able to obtain further intelligence of you, I 
passed some weeks of very painful solicitude. 
At the conclusion of the cami>aign I obtained 
leave of absence, and immediately set out for 
Paris, hoping to learn from Nemours where 
you had found an asylum. 

' ' Of this, however, he was equally ignorant 
witli myself. He informed me that you had 

once l^eforc written to him from D , up>oa 

your second day's journey from Paris, under 
an assumed name, as had been agreed upon ; 
and that you then said the fear of discovery 
would pre\'cnt your hazarding another letter ; 
he th<*refoie remained ignorant of your abode, 
but said he had no doubt you had continued 
your journey to the southward. 

"Upon this slender information I quitted 
Paris in search of you, and proceeded imme- 
diately to V , where my inquiries concern- 
ing your farther progress were successful as 

far as M . There they told me you had 

stayed some time, on account of the illness of 
a young lady, a circumstance which p^erplexed 
me much, as I could not imagine what young 
lady would accompany you. I proceeded, 

however, to L ; but there all traces of 

you seemed to be lost. As I sat musing at 
the window of the inn, I observed some 
scribbling on the glass, and the curiosity of 
idleness prompted me to read it. I thought 
I knew the characters, and the lines I read 
confirmed my conjecture, for I remembered 
to have heard you often rejieat Iheni. 

" Here I renewed my inquiries concerning 
your route, and at length I made the people 
of the inn recollect you, and traced you as 
far as Auboine. There I again lost you, till 
upon my return from a fniilless inquiry in the 
neighbourhood, the landlord of the little inn 
where [ lodged told me he believed he had 
heard news of you, and immediately recounted 
what had hai)pencd at a blacksmith's shop a 
few hours before. 

"His description of Peter was so exact, 
that I had not a doubt it was you who in- 
habited the abbey ; and as I knew your neces- 
sity for concealment, Peter's denial did not 
shake my confidence. The next morning, 
with the assistance of my landlord, I found 
my way hither, and having searched every 
visible part of the fabric, I began to credit 
Peter's assertion ; your appearance, however, 
destroyed this fear, by proving that the place 
was still inhabited, for you disappeared so 
instantaneously, that I was not certain it 
was you whom I had seen. I continued seek- 
ing you till near the close of day, and till 
then scarcely quitted the chambers whence 
you had disappeared. I called on you re- 
peatedly, believing that my voice might con- 
vince you of your mistake. At length I re- 
Ured, to pass the night at a cottage near the 
Jborder of the forest. 



" I came early this morning to renew my 
inquiries, and hoped that, believing yourseff 
safe, you would emerge from concealment. 
But how was I disappomted to find the abbey 
as silent and solitary as I had left it the 
previous evening! I Avas returning once 
more from the great hall, when the voice of 
this young lady caught my ear, and effected 
the discovery I had so anxiously sought. " 

This little narrative entirely dissipated the 
first apprehensions of La Motte ; but he now 
dreaded that the inquiries of his son and his 
own obvious desire of concealment, might 
excite a curiosity amongst the people of 
Auboine and lead to a discovery of his true 
circumstances. However, for the present he 
determined to dismiss all painful thoughts^ 
and endeavour to enjoy the comfort which 
the presence of his son had brought him. 
The furniture was removed to a more habit- 
able part of the abbey, and the cells were 
again abandoned to their own glooms. 

The arrival of her son seemed to have 
animated Madame La Motte with new life, 
and all her afflictions were for the present 
absorbed in joy. She often gazed silently on 
him with a mother's fondness, and her par- 
tiality heightened every improvement wbidi 
time had wrought in his person and manner. 
He was now in his twenty-third year ; his 
person was manly and his air military ; bis 
manners were unaffected and graceful rather 
than dignified ; and though his features were 
irregular, they composed a countenance 
which, having seen it once, you would seek 
again. 

She made eager inquiries after the friends 
she had left at Paris, and learned that, within 
the few months of her absence, some had 
died and others quitted the place. La Motte 
also learned that a very strenuous search for 
him had been prosecuted at Paris ; and 
though this intelligence was only what he had 
before expected, it shocked him so much that 
he now decbred it would be expedient to 
remove to a distant country. Louis did not 
scruple to say that he thought he would be as 
safe at the abbey as at any other place ; and 
repeated what Nemours had said, that the 
King's ofhcers had been unable to trace any 
part of his route from Paris. 

" Besides," resumed Louis, "this abbey is 
protected by a supernatural power, and none 
of the country people dare approach it." 

" Please you, my young master," said" 
Peter, who was waiting in the room, "we 
were frightened enough the first night we- 
came here, and I myself, God forgive me!. 
thought the place was inhabited by devils, 
but tliey were only owls and such hke after 
all." 

"Your opinion was not asked," said La 
Motte ; " learn to be silent." 

Peter was abashed. When he had quitted 
l\ie room, La Motte asked his son with seem- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



33 



ing carelessness, what were the reports circu- 
lated by the country people. 

" Oh, sir," replied Louis, " I cannot recol- 
lect half of them. I remember, however, they 
said that manyyears ago a person (but nobody 
had ever seen him, so we may judge how far 
tlie report ought to be credited) was privately 
brought to this abbey and confined in some 
part of it, and that there were strong reasons 
to believe he came unfairly to his end." 

La Motte sighed. 

"They further said," continued Louis, 
" that the spectre of the deceased had ever 
since watched nightly among the ruins ; and, 
to make the st<My more wonderful — for the 
marvellous is the delight of the vulgar — they 
added that there was a certain part of the 
ruin from whence no person that had dared to 
explore it had ever returned. Thus people 
who have few objects of real interest to engage 
their thoughts, conjure up for themselves 
imaginary ones." 

La Motte sat musing. "And what were 
the reasons," said he, at length awaking from 
his reverie, "they pretended to assign for 
believing the person confined here was mur- 
dered?" 

• • They did not use a term so positive as 
that," replied Louis. 

"True," said La Motte, recollecting him- 
self, " they only said he came unfairly to his 
end." 

" That is a nice distinction," said Adeline. 

" Why, I could not well comprehend what 
these reasons were," resumed Louis; "the 
people indeed say that the person who was 
brought here was never known to depart, but 
I do not find it certain that he ever arrived ; 
that there was strange privacy and mystery 
observed while he was here, and that the 
abbey has never since been inhabited by its 
owner. There seems, however, to be nothing 
in all this that deserves to be remembered." 

La Motte raised his head as if to reply, 
when the entrance of Madame turned the dis- 
course upon a new* subject, and it was not 
resumed that day. 

Peter was now despatched for provisions, 
while La Motte and Louis retired to consider 
how far it was safe for them to continue at the 
abbey. La Motte, notwithstanding the assur- 
ances lately given him, could not but think 
that Peter's blunders and his son's inquiries 
might lead to a discovery of his residence. 
He resolved this in his mind for some time, 
but at length a thought struck him that the 
latter of these circumstances might consider- 
ably contribute to his security. " If you," 
said he to Louis, "return to the inn at 
Auboinc from whence you were directed 
here, and without seeming to intend giving 
intelligence, do give the hmdlord an account 
of your having found the abbey uninhabited, 
and then add, that you had discovered the 
residence of the person you sought in some 



distant town, it would suppress any repoits 
that may at present exist, and prevent the 
belief of any in future. And if after nil this 
you can trust yourself for presence of mind 
and command of countenance so far as to 
describe some dreadful apparition, I think 
these circumstances, together with the dis- 
tance of the abbey and the intricacies of the 
forest, could entitle me to consider this place 
as my castle." 

Louis agreed to all that his father had pro- 
posed, and on the following day executed his 
commission with such success, that the tran- 
quillity of the abbey may be then said to huvc 
been entirely restored. 

Thus ended this adventure, the only one 
that had occurred to disturb the family during 
their residence in the forest. Adeline, removed 
from the apprehension of those evils with 
which the late situation of I-ra Motte had 
threatened her, and from the depression which 
her interest in his occasioned her, now ex- 
perienced a more than usual complacency of 
mind. She thought, too, that she observed 
in Madame La Motte a renewal of her former 
kindness, and this circumstance awakened all 
her gratitude, and imparted to her a pleasure 
as lively as it w;is innocent. The satisfaction 
with which the presence of her son inspired 
Madame La Motte, Adeline mistook for kind^ 
ness to herself, and she exerted her whole 
attention in an endeavour to become worthy 
of it. 

But the joy which his unexpected arrival 
had given to La Motte quickly began to 
evaporate, and the gloom of despondency 
again settled on his countenance. He returned 
frequently to his haunt in the forest — the same 
mysterious sadness tinctured his manner, and 
revived the anxiety of Madame La Motte, who 
was resolved to acquaint her son with this 
subject of distress, and solicit his assistance to 
discover its source. 

Her jealousy of Adeline, however, she could 
not communicate, though it again tormented 
her, and taught her to misconstrue with 
wonderful ingenuity every look and word of 
La Motte, and often to mistake the artless ex- 
pressions of Adeline's gratitude and regard 
for those of warmer tenderness. Adeline had 
formerly accustomed herself to long walks 
in the forest, and the design Madame had 
formed of watching her steps had been 
frustrated by the late circumstances, and was 
now entirely overcome by her sense of its 
difficulty and danger. To employ Peter in 
the affair would be to acquaint him with her 
fears, and to follow her herself would most 
probably betray her scheme by making Adeline 
aware of her jealousy. Being thus restrained 
by pride and delicacy, she was obliged to en- 
dure the pangs of uncertainty concerning her 
suspicions. 

To Louis, however, sVv^ T^\aX^^ ^^ \tt^^\.^- 
rious change in b\s iaX\\et:'^ xisra^^t. ^^X^s.- 



34 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



tened to her account with vcr>' earnest atten- 
tion, and the surprise and concern impressed 
upon his countenance sp)oke how much his 
heart was interested. He was, however, in- 
volved in equal perplexity with herself upon 
this subject, and reiidily luidertook to observe 
the motions of La Motte, believing his inter- 
ference likely to be of equal service both to 
his father and his mother. He saw, in some 
degree, the suspicions of his mother, but as 
he thought she wished to disguise her feel- 
ings, he suffered her to believe that she suc- 
ceeded. 

He now inquired concerning Adeline, and 
listened to her little history, of which his 
mother gave a brief relation, with great appa- 
rent interest. So much pity did he e.\press 
for her condition, and so much indignation 
at the unnatural conduct of her father, that 
the apprehensions which Madame La lilotte 
began to form of his having discovered her 
jealousy yielded to those of a different kind. 
JShe perceived that the beauty of Adeline had 
already fascinated his imagination, and she 
feared that her amiable manners would soon 
impress his heart. Had her first fondness for 
Adeline continued, she would still have looked 
with displeasure upon their attachment as an 
obstacle to the promotion and the fortune she 
hoped to see one day enjoyed by her son. On 
these she rested all her future hopes of pros- 
perity, and regarded the matrimonial alliance 
which he might form as the only means of ex- 
tricating his family from their present diffi- 
culties. She therefore touched lightly upon 
Adeline's merit, coolly joined with Louis in 
compassionating her misfortunes, and, with 
her censure of the father's conduct, mLxed an 
implied suspicion of that of Adeline's. The 
means she employed to repress the jDassions 
of her son had a contrary effect. The indif- 
ference which she expressed towards Adeline 
increased his pity for her destitute condition, 
and the tenderness with Which she affected to 
judge the father heightened his honest indig- 
nation at his character. 

As he quitted Madame La Motte he saw 
his father cross the lawn and enter the deep 
shade of the forest on the left. He judged 
this to be a good opportunity of commencing 
his plan, and, quilting the abbey, slowly fol- 
lowed at a distance. La Motte continued to 
walk straight forward, and seemed so deeply 
wrajn in thought that he looked neither to 
the right or left, and scarcely lifted his head 
from the ground. Ix)uis had followed him 
near half a mile when he saw him suddenly 
strike into an avenue of the forest which took 
a different direction from the way he had 
hitherto gone, lie quickened his steps that 
he mi^^ht not lose sight of him ; but, having 
rt;achcd the avenue, kmnd the trees so ihicklv 
inteiw<n'en that La Motte was already hid 
fro^m liis view. 

lie continued, howtwcx, to pursue the way 



before him; it conducted him through the 
most gloomy part of the forest he had yet 
seen, till at length it terminated in an obscure 
recess, overarched with high trees, whose in- 
terwoven branches excluded the direct rays of 
the sun. and admitted only a sort of solenm 
twilight. Louis looked around in search of 
La Motte, but he was nowhere to be seen. 
Wliile he stood surveying the place, and con- 
sidering what further should be done, he ob- 
served through the gloom an object at some 
distance, but the deep shadow that fell around 
prevented his distinguishing what it was. 

On advancing he perceived the ruins of a 
small building, which, from the traces that- 
remained, appeared to have been a tomb. As 
he gazed upon it, " Here," said he, *' are 
probably deposited the ashes of some ancient 
monk, once an inhabitant of the abbey — ^per- 
haps the founder — ^who, after having spent 
a life of abstinence and prayer, sought in 
heaven the reward of his forbearance upon 
earth. Peace be to his soul ! But did Jie 
think a life of mere negative virtue deserved 
an eternal reward ? Mistaken man I Reason, 
had you trusted to its dictates, would have in- 
formed you that the active virtues — the adhe- 
rence to the c[olden rule, ' Do as you would 
be done unto — could alone deserve the favour 
of a Deity whose glonr is benevolence. " 

He remained with his eyes fixed ujx>n the 
spot, and presently saw a figure arise under 
the arch of the sepulchre. It started, as if 
on perceiving him, and immediately disap- 
peared. Louis, though unused to fear, felt 
at that moment an uneasy sensation, but it 
almost immediately struck him that this was 
La Motte himself. He advanced to the ruin 
and called him. No answer was returned, 
and he repeated the call, but all was yet stiU 
as the grave. He then went up to the arch- 
way and endeavoured to examine the place 
wliere he had disappeared, but the shadowy 
obscurity rendered the attempt fruitless. He 
observed, however, a little to the right, an 
entrance to the ruin, and advanced some 
steps down a dark kind of passage, when, re- 
collecting that this place might be the haunt 
of banditti, his danger alarmed him, and he 
retreated with precipitation. 

He walked towards the abbey by the way 
he came, and finding no person followed him, 
and believing himself again in safety, his 
former surmise returned, and he thought it 
was La Motte he had seen. He miised upon 
this strange possibility, and endeavoured to 
assign a reason for so mysterious a conduct, 
but in vain. Notwithstanding this, his belief 
of it strengthened, and he entered the abbey 
imder as full a conviction as the circum- 
stances would admit of that it was his father 
wlio had appeared in the sepulchre. On en- 
lorinii^ wis. It was now used «is a parlour, he 
was much suri^iised to find him quietly seated 
l\\crc \\\v\\ "^VAOivWw^i l^-a. Moile and Adeline, 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



35 



and conversing as if he had been returned 
some time. • 

He took the first opportunity of accjunint- 
ing his mother with the late adventure, and 
of inquiring how long La Motte had been re- 
turned before him ; when, learning that it was 
near half an hour, his surprise increased, and 
he knew not what to conclude. 

Meanwhile, a perception of the growing 
partiality of Louis co-operated with the can- 
ker of suspicion to destroy in Madame I^ 
Motte that affection which pity and esteem 
had formerly excited for Adeline. Her un- 
kindness was now too obvious to escape the 
notice of her to whom it was directed, and, 
being noticed, it occasioned an anguish which 
Adeline found it very difficult to endure. 
With the warmth and candour of youth, she 
sought an explanation of this change of beha- 
viour and an opportunity of exculpating her- 
self from any intention of provoking it. But 
this Madame La Motte artfully evaded, while 
at the same time she threw out hints that 
involved Adeline in deeper perplexity, and 
served to make her present affliction more 
intolerable. 

"I have lost that affection," she would 
say, "which was my all. It was my only 
conafort — ^yet I have lost it — and this without 
even knowing my offence. But I am thank- 
ful I have not merited unkindness, and though 
she has abandoned vie, I shall alwavs love 
her." 

Thus distressed, she would frequently leave 
the parlour, and, retiring to her chamber, 
would yield to a despondency which she had 
never known till now. 

One morning, being unable to sleep, she 
arose at a very early hour. The faint light of 
day now trembled through the clouds, and, 
gradually spreading from the horizon, an- 
nounced the rising sun. Every feattu-e of the 
landscape was slowly unveiled, moist \vith the 
dews of night, and brightening with the 
dawn, till at length the sun appeared and 
shed the full flood of day. The benuty of 
the hour invited her to walk, and she went 
forth into the forest to taste the sweets of 
morning. The carols of new-waked birds 
saluted her as she passed, and the fresh gale 
came scented with the breath of flowers, 
whose tints glowed more vivid through the 
dewdrops that hung on their leaves. 

She wandered on without noticing the dis- 
tance, and, following the windings of the 
river, came to a dewy glade, whose woods, 
sweeping down to the very edge of the water, 
formed a scene so sweetly romantic that she 
seated herself at the foot of a tree to contem- 
plate its beauty. These images insensibly 
soothed her sorrow, and inspired her with 
that pleasing melancholy so dear to the feel- 
ing mind. For some time she sat lost in a 
reverie, while the flowers that grew on the 
banks beside her seemed to smile in new life, 



and drew from her a comparison with her 
own condition. She mused and sighed, and 
tiien in a voice whose charming nielotly was 
modulated by the tenderness of her heart, sIms 
sung the following words :— 

SONNET. 

TO TUB LH.V. 

Soft silken flow'r ! that in the dewy vale 
Unfolds thy modot beauties to the morn, 

And breath'st thy fra^rrance on her waud'ring gale. 
O'er earth's green hills and shadowy valleys borne : 

When da>* has closed his da/^ling eye, 

And dying gales sink suft away ; 
When eve steals down the western sky, 

And mountains, woods, and vales decay : 

Thy tender cups, that graceful swell, 

Droop sad 1>cneath lier chilly dews ; 
Thy odours seek their silken cell, 

And twilight veils thy languiil hues. 

But soon, fair flow'r ! the mum shall rise, 

And rear again thy pensive head ; 
Again unveil thy snowy dj'es, 

Again thy velvet foliage spread. 

Sweet child of spring ! like thee, in sorrow's shade, 
Full oft I mourn in tcarsj and droop forlorn : 

And, oh ! like thine, may light mv gloom pervade. 
And sorrow lly before joy's living morn ! 

A distant echo lengthened out her tones, 
and she sat listening to the soft response, till, 
repeating the last stanza of the sonnet, she 
was answered by a voice almost as tender, 
and less distant. She looked round in sur- 
prise, and saw a young man in a hunter's 
dress, leaning against a tree, and gazing on 
her with that deep attention which marks an 
enamoured mind. 

A thousand apprehensions shot athwart 
her busy thought ; and she now first remem- 
bered her distance from the abbey. She rose 
in haste to be gone, when the stranger re- 
spectfully advanced ; but observing her timid 
looks and retiring steps he paused. She pur- 
sued her way towards the abbey ; and, though 
many reasons made her anxious to know 
whether she was followed, deUcacy forbade 
her to look back. When she reached the 
abbey, finding the family was not yet assem- 
bled to breakfast, she retired to her chamber, 
where her whole thoughts were employed in 
conjectures concerning the stranger ; believing 
that she was interested on this point no 
further than as it concerned the safety of La 
Motte, she indulged, without scruple, the 
remembrance of that dignified air and manner 
which so much distinguished the youth she 
had seen. After revolving the circumstance 
more deeply, she believed it impossible that 
a person of his appearance should be engaged 
in a stratagem to betray a fellow-creature ; 
and though she was destitute of a single cir- 
cumstance that might assist her surmises of 
who he was, or what was his business in an 
unfrequented forest, shfe Te\t^\ft^, >3cwcc>i\\.- 
scionsly, every s\]i&p\,doxv mvxcvQVkS Vi \sis^ 

C3i 



36 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



character. Upon further deliboration, there- 
fore, she resolved not to mention this little 
circumstance to I^a Moite, well knowing that 
though his danger might be imaginary, his 
apprehensions would be real, and would re- 
new ail the sulTerings and perplexity from 
which he was but just released. She resolved, 
however, to refrain for some time walking 
in the forest. 

When she came down to breakfast she 
observed Madame La Motte to be more than 
usually reserved. La Motte entered the room 
soon after her, and made some trifling observa- 
tion on the weather ; and, having endea- 



its object is a disgrace, instead of an honour, 
to both parties." 

The manner and emphasis with which she 
delivered these words again alanncd Adeline, 
who mildly said, "She hoped she should 
never deserve such censure." Madame was 
silent ; but Adeline was so much shocked by 
what had already passed, that tears sprung 
from her eyes, and she hid her face with her 
handkerchief. 

Louis now arose with some emotion ; and 
La Motte, roused from his reverie, inquired 
what was the matter ; but, before he could 
receive an answer, he seemed to have forgot 



voured to support an effort at cheerfulness, that he had asked a question. 



sunk into his usual melancholy. Adeline 
watched the countenance of Madame with 
anxiety; and when there appeared in it a 
gleam of kindness, it was as sunshine to her 
soul ; but she very seldom suffered Adeline 
thus to flatter herself. Her conversation was 
restrained, and often pointed at something 
more than could be understood. The 
entrance of Louis was a very seasonable 
relief to Adeline, who almost feared to inist 



Adeline may give you her own account. 
said Madame La Motte. 

"I have not deserved this," said Adeline. 
rising ; ' ' but since my presence is displeasing. 
I will retire." 

She moved towards the door, when Louis. 
who was pacing the room in apparent 
agitation, gently took her hand, saying, " Here 
is some unhappy mistake," and would have 
led her to her seat ; but her spirits were too 



her voice with a sentence, lest its trembling much depressed to endure a longer restraint ; 



accents should betray her uneasiness. 

"This charming morning drew you early 
from your chamber," said Louis, addressing 
Adeline. 

" You had, no doubt, a pleasant companion 
too," said Madame La Motte, "a solitary 
walk is seldom agreeable." 

" I was alone, madam," replied Adeline. 

"Indeed! your own thoughts must be 
highly pleasing then." 

"Alas !" returned Adeline, a tear, sjMte of 
her efforts, starting to her eye, "there are 
now few subjects of pleasure left for tlicm." 



" That isvery surprising," pursued Madame esteeming them.' 



and withdrawing her hand, " Suffer me to go," 
said she ; " if there is any hiistake, I am un- 
able to explain it." Saying this she quitted 
the room. 

Louis followed her with his eyes to the 
door ; when, turning to his mother, " Surely, 
madam," said he, " you are to blame : my life 
on it, she deserves your warmest tenderness." 

" You are very eloquent in her cause, sir," 
said Madame : " may I presume to ask what 
has interested you thus in her favour?" 

"Her own amiable manners," rejoined 
Louis, "which no one can observe without 



La Motte. 

" It is indeed surprising, madam, for those 
who have lost their last friend to be un- 
happy?" 

Madame La Molte's conscience acknow- 
ledged the rebuke, and she blushed. "Well," 
resumed she, after a short pause, " that is not 
your situation, Adeline ; " looking earnestly at 
La Motte. 

Adeline, whose innocence protected her from 
suspicion, did not regard this circumstance ; 
but, smiling through her tears, said, "She 
rejoiced to hear her say so." 

During this conversation, La Motte had re- 
mained absorbed in his own thoughts ; and 
Louis, unable to guess at what it pointed, 
looked alternately at his mother and Adeline 



' ' But you may presume too much on your 
own observations ; it is possible these amiable 
manners may deceive you." 

"Your pardon, madam; I may, without 
presumption, affirm they cannot deceive me." 

"You have, no doubt, good reasons for 
this assertion ; and I perceive, by your ad- 
miration of this artless innocent, she has 
succeeded in her design of entrapping your 
heart." 

"Without designing it she has won my 
admiration, which would not have been the 
case had she been capable of the conduct you 
mention." 

Madame La Motte was going to reply, but 
was j)r evented by her husband, who, again 
roused from his reverie, inquired into the cause 



for an explanation. The latter he regarded of disi)ute : "Away with this ridiculous be- 



with an expression so full of tender com- 
passion that it revealed at once to Madame 
La Motte the sentiments of his soul ; and she 
immediately replied to the last words of 
AdeYmc nith a very serious air : "A friend 
is only estimable when our conduct deserves 



haviour," said he, in a voice of displeasure. 
" Adeline has omitted some household duty, 
I suppose, and an offence so heinous deserves 
severe punishment, no doubt ; but let me be 
no more disturbed wth your petty quarrels : 
\i 'you must be tyrannical, madam, indulge. 



one; the friendship that survives the merit oi "joux \iMinoMi 'm^fw^te,' 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



37 



Saying this he abruptly quitted the room, 
and Louis inunediately following, Madame 
was left to her own unpleasant reflections. 
Her iU-humour proceeded from the usual cause. 
She had heard of Adeline's walk ; and I^ 
Motte having gone forth into the forest at an 
early hour, her imagination, heated by the 
broodings of jealousy, suggested that they had 
appointed a meeting. This was confirmed 
to her by the entrance of Adeline, quickly 
followed by La Motle ; and her perceptions 
thus jaundiced by passion, neither the presence 
of her son nor her usual attention to good 
manners had been able to restrain her 
emotions. The behaviour of Adeline in the 
late scene she considered as a fine piece of 
art. and the indifl*erence of La Motte as 
affected. So true it is that 

Trifles light as air, 
Are to the jealous confirmations strong. 
As pTO<^ of Holy Writ. 

And so ingenious was she " to twist the true 
cause the wrong way." 

Adeline had retired to her chamber to weep. 
When her first agitation had subsided, she 
took an ample review of her conduct ; and 
perceiving nothing of which she could accuse 
herself, she became more satisfied, deriving 
her best comfort from the integrity of her in- 
tentions. In the moment of accusation, 
innocence may sometimes be oppressed with 
the punishment due only to guilt ; but re- 
flection dissolves the illusions of terror, and 
brings to the aching bosom the consolations 
of virtue. 

When La Motte quitted the room, he had 
gone into the forest, which Louis observing, 
he followed and joined him, with an intention 
of touching upon the subject of his melancholy. 

" It is a fine morning, sir," said Louis ; " if 
you will give me leave, I will walk with you." 

La Motte, though dissatisfied, did not 
object ; and after they had proceeded some 
way, he changed the course of his walk, 
striking into a path contrary to that which 
Louis had observed him take on the foregoing 
day. 

Louis remarked that the avenue they had 
quitted was " more shady ; nnd, therefore, 
more pleasant." I^ Motte not seeming to 
notice this remark, "It leads to a singular 
spot," continued he, "which I discovered 
yesterday." I>a Motte raised his bead ; 
Louis proceeded to describe the to nil), and 
the adventure he had met with. During his 
relation La Motte regarded him with earnest 
attention, while his own countenance suffered 
various changes. 

When he had concluded, " You wore very 
daring," said La Motte, "to examine that 
place, particularly when you ventured down 
the passage ; I would advise you to be more 
cautious how you penetrate the depths of this 
forest. I myself have not ventured beyond 



a certain boundary, and am therRsrc un- 
informerl what iniiabilants it may harbour. 
Your account has alarmed me," continuerl he, 
"for if banditti are in the neighl>ourhoo(i I 
am not safe from their depredations : 'tis 
true I have but little to lose, except my life." 

"And the lives of your family," rejoined 
Louis. 

" Of course," said I^ Motte. 

" It would l)e well to have more certainty 
upon that head," rejoined I^uis ; "I am 
considering how we may obtain it." 

" 'Tis useless to consider that," said T-a 
Motte; " the inquiry itself brings danger with 
it ; your life would, pirrh.ips, be pairl for the 
indulgence of your curiosity ; our only chance 
of safety is by endeavouring to remain unrlis- 
covered. I^t us move towards the abl)cy." 

Ix)uis knew not what to think, but said no 
more upon the subject. La Motte soon after 
relapsed into a fit of musing ; and his son 
now took occasion to lament that de])ression 
of spirits which he had lately observed in 
him. 

" Rather lament the cause of it," said La 
Motte, with a sigh. 

" That I do most sincerely, whatever it may 
be. May 1 venture to inquire, sir, what is the 
cause ? " 

"Are, then, my misfortunes so little known 
to you," rejoined La Motte, " as to make the 
question necessary? Am I not driven from 
my home, from my friends, and almost from 
my country, and shall it be asked why I am 
afflicted?" 

Louis felt the justice of this reproof, and 
was for a moment silent. 

"That you are afflicted, sir, does not ex- 
cite my surprise," resumed he; "it would, 
indeed, be strange were you not." 

" What, then, does excite your surprise?" 

" The air of cheerfulness you wore when I 
first came hither." 

"You lately lamented that I was afflicted," 
said La Motte, " and now seem not very well 
pleased that I once was cheerful. What is 
the meaning of this ? " • 

"You much mistake me," said his son; 
" nothing could give me so much satisfaction 
as to see that cheerfulness renewed ; the same 
cause of sorrow existed at that time, yet you 
was then cheerful." 

" That I was then cheerful," said La Motte, 
"you might, without flattery, have attributed 
to yourself ; your presence revived me, and I 
was relieved, at the same time, from a load of 
apprehension." 

"Why, then, since the same cause exists, 
are you not still cheerful ? " 

"And why do you not recollect that it is 
your father you thus speak to? " 

"I do, sir; and nothing but anxiety for 
my father could have urged me thus far. It 
is with inexpressible concern I perceive, ^Qvi. 
have some secrel cause ol \xBcasmRsa\ \^N^a\ 



38 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



it, sir, to those who claim a share in all your 
afflii.iion, and suffur them, by participation, 
tu soften its severity." 

l^)uis looked up, and observed the coun- 
tenance of his father pale as death ; his lips 
tri'inl>i','rl wliile he sp<jke. 

" YiMir penetration, however you may rely 
up'jii it, has, in the pres<:nt instance, de- 
c'lvcd you. I have no subject of distress but 
what you are already acquainted with, and I 
di.'-ijre this conversation may never be re- 
newal 1." 

" If it is your d&sirc, of course I obey," 

sai'l Louis ; "but pardon me, sir, if " 

" I will not pardon you, sir," interrupted 
La Mottc ; "let the discourse end here." 
Sayinj^ this, he quickened his stops, and 
lyouis, not daring to pursue, walked quietly 
on till he reached the abbey. 

.\d«:line passed the greatest part of the day 
alone in her chamber, where, having examined 
her conduct, she endeavoured to fortify her 
heart against the unmerited displeasure of 
Madame La Mottc. 'Iliis was a ta^^k more 
difficult than that of self-acquaintance. She 
loved her, and had relied on her friendship, 
which, notwithstanding the conduct of Ma- 
dame, still appearcfl valuable*. It was true 
she had not deserved to lose it, but .Madame 
was so averse to explanation, that there was 
little probability of recovrring it, however ill- 
founfi.id might be the cause of her dislike. 
At length she reasoned, or rather, perhaps, 
pcrsu:ided herself into Ujlerable composure ; 
for to resign a real good with contentment is 
less an eflbrt of reason than of temper. 

For many hours she busied herself upon a 
piece of work which she had undertaken for 
Madame La Mottc ; and this she did with- 
out the least intention of conciliating her 
favour, but because she felt there was some- 
thing in thus repaying unkindness which was 
suitable to her own tcm]XT, sentiments, and 
pride. Solf-love may be the centre round 
which the human affrclions move, for what- 
ever mr)tive conduces to self-gratification may 
bo resolved into self4ove ; yet some of these 
affc'tions are in their nature so refined, that 
though we cannot deny their origin, they 
alni'ist deserve the name of virtue. Of this 
5p'" les was that of Adeline. 

In this employment, and in reading, Ade- 
line ])assi?d as much of the day as j)ossible. 
l''njni iKjoks, indeed, she had constantly de- 
rived h(T chief information and amusement ; 
those b(»l()nging to La Motte were few but 
well chosen, and Adeline could find pleasure 
in reading them more than once. When her 
mind was discomposed by the behaviour of 
Madame La Motte, or by a retrospection of 
her <^arly misfortune^, a book was the opiate 
that lulled it to rei)ose. La .Motte had several 
of llif* best llnghsh pocrts, a language which 
AflrJhu: hn(] Jenrned in the coiivent ; their 
iMnuitics, thcrcforu, she was capable of last- 



ing, and they often inspired her with enthasi- 
ostic delight. 

At the decline of day she quitted her chnnw 
ber to enjoy the sweet evening hour, but 
strayed no farther than an avenue near the 
abl)ey, which fronted the west. She read a 
little, but, finding it impossible any longer to 
abstract her attention from the scene around, 
she closed the book, and )nelded to the sweet 
complacent melancholy which the hour in- 
spired. The air was still ; the sun, sinking 
below the distant hills, spread a purple glow 
over the landscape, and touched the forest 
glades with softer light. A dc\vy freshness 
was diffused upon the air. As the sun de- 
scended, and the dusk came silently on, the 
scene assumed a solemn grandeur. As she 
mused, she recollected and repeated the fol- 



lowing stanzas : 



NIGHT. 



Now ev'ning fades ! her pensive step retires. 

And night leads on the dews, and snadowyhoors— 
Her awful pomp of planetary fires, 

And all her train of visionary powers. 

TuKSE paint with fleeting shapes the dream of sleep, 
T:f RSE swell the waking soul with p!e.x<ung dread ; 

These through the g^looms in forms terrific sweep. 
And rouse the thrilling hoirors of the dead ! 

Qnecn of the solemn thought — mysterious night 
Whose step is darkness^ and whose voice in fear— 

Tliy shades I welcome with severe delight, 
And hail thy hollow gales, that sigh so drear ! 

When wrapt in clouds, and riding in the blast. 
Thou roll'st the storm along the sounding shove, 

I love to watch the whelming billows, cast 
Oil rocks below, and listen to the roar. 

Thy milder terrors, night, I frequent woo. 
Thy silent HRhtnings and thy meteor's glare. 

Thy nortlicrn fires, bright with ensanguine hue, 
Th.1t light in heaven s high vault the fervid air. 

But chief I love thee when thy lucid car 
.Sheds through the fleecy clouds a trembling gleam, 

And shows the misty mountain from afar. 
The nearer forest, and the valley's stream : 

And nameless objects in the vale below, 
That, floating dimly, to the musing eye 

Assume, at fancy's touch, fantastic snoWj 
.And raise her sweet romantic visions high. 

Tlicn let mc stand amid thy glooms profound. 
On SDrnc \v\\d woody steep, and hear the breeze 

Th.1t swells in mournfiil melody around. 
And faintly dies upon the distant trees. 

What melancholy charm steals o'er the mind ! 

NVhai h.illow'cf tears the rising rapture greet ! 
While many a viewless spirit in the wind 

Sighs to the lonely hour in accent sweet! 

Ah ! Avho the dear illusions pleas'd would yield, 
Whi'rh fancy wakes from silence and from shades, 

For .ill the sober forms of truth rcvcal'd. 
For all the scenes that day's bright eye pervades I 

On her return to the abbey she was joined 
by Ix)uis, who after .some conversation said : 
" I am much gineved by the scene to which I 
Yfas y^liuciis this morning, and have longed 



THE ROMAMCE OF THE FOREST, 39 

for an opportunity of telling you so. My length discovered his retreat, and the per- 
Qiothcr's behaviour is too mysterious for me turb;itioii of fear almost confounded his 
to account for, but it is not difficult to per- senses ; he, however, orderwl the lights to bo 
ceive she laboiu^s under some mistake. What extinguished and a profoimd silence to l>e ob- 
I have to request is that whenever I can Ixi of f=eivod, unwilling to neglect the slightest pos- 
service to you, you will command mc." sibility of security. There was a chance, he 

Adeline thanked him for his friendly offer, thought, that the persons might suppose the 
which she felt more sensibly than she chose to place uninhabited, and believe they had mis- 
express. "I am unconscious," said she, " of taken the object of their search. His orders 
any offence that may have deserved Madame were scarcely ol)eyed when tlie knocking was 
La Motte's displeasure, and am therefore renewed, and with increased violence. I^ 
totally unable to account for it. I have re- Motte now repaired to a small grated window 
peateidly sought an explanation, which she has in the ix)rtal of the gale, that he might oli- 
as anxiously avoided ; it is better, therefore, serve the number and appearance of the 
to press the subject no farther. At the same strangers. 

time, sir, suffer me to assiu-e you I have a The clirkness of the night baffled his pur- 
just sense of >*our goodness." pose — he could only perceive a group of men 
Ix)ui5 sighed and was silent. At length, "I on horseback; but, listening attentively, he 
wish you would permit me," resumed he, "to distinguished a part of their discourse. Several 
speak with my mother upon this subject. I of the men contended that they had nust;iken 
am sure T could convince her of her error." the place, till a person, who from his autho- 
" By no means, "replied Adeline. "Madame r'tative voice appeared to be their leader, 
La Motte's displeasure has given me incx- affirmed that the lights had issued from this 
pressible concern ; but to compel her to an spot, and he was positive there were persons 
explanation would only increase this displca- within. Having said this, he again knocked 
sure instead of removing it. Let me beg of loudly at the gate, and was answered only by 
you not to attempt it." hollow echoes. Ijm Motte's heart trembled at 

" I submit to your judgment," said Louis ; ^^^^ sound, and he was unable to move, 
"but for once it is with reluctance ; I should After waiting some time the strangers 
esteem myself most happy if I could be of seemed as if in consultation, b!it their dis- 
service io you." course was conducted in such a low tone of 
He spoke this with an accent so tender, that y°^^® ^^^^^ La Motte was unable to distinguisli 
Adeline for the first time perceived the }^s purport. They withdrew from tlie gate ps 
sentiments of his heart. A mind more fraught ^^ '^ depart, but he presently thought he 
with vanity than hers would have taught her heard them amongst the trees on the other 
long ago to regard the attentions of Louis as side of the fabric, and soon became con- 
the result of something more than well-bred vinced they had not left the abbey. A few 
gallantry. She did not appear to notice his """"tes held La Motte in a state of torturing 
last words, but remained silent, and involun- suspense ; he quitted the grate, where I^uis 
tarily quickened her pace. Louis saitl no "°^ stationed himself, for that part of the 
more, but seemed sunk in thought ; and this edifice which overlooked tlie spot where he 
silence remained uninterrupted till they entered supposed them to be waiting. 
the abbey. The stornj was now loud, and the hollow 

blasts which rushed among tlie trees pre- 
vented his distinguishing any other sound. 
CHAPTER VL Once, in a pause of the wind, he thought he 
„ 1. -Li 1- J . heard voices, but he was not long left to con- 

Un«.l m^k^r^X^ . '''*''°" ' |f "rknnnlt°, '^Tt '5°^'""^ at the gate 

Sh\v<;ppvp» ^g^m appalled him; and, regardless of the 
OHAKSPEARE. tcrTors of Madame La Motte and Adeline, he 
Near a month elapsed without any remark- ran to try his last chance of concealment by 
able occurrence. The melancholy of I^a Motte nieans of the trap-door. 
suffered little abatement ; and the behaviour Soon after, the violence of the assailants 
of Madame to Adeline, though somewhat seeming to increase with every gfust of the 
softened, was still far from kind. Louis, by tempest, the gate, which was old and de- 
numberless little attentions, testified his grow- cayed, burst from its hinges and admitted 
ing affection for Adeline, who continued to them to the hall. At the moment of their 
treat them as passing civilities. entrance, a scream from Madame I-a Motte, 
It happened one stormy night, as they were who stood at the door of an adjoining apart- 
preparing for rest, that they were alarmed by ment, confirmed the suspicion of the principal 
the tramping of horses near the abbey. The stranger, who continued to ackance as fast as 
sound of several voices succeeded, and a loud the darkness would permit him. 
knocking at the great gate of the hall soon Adeline had fainted, and Madartie La 
after confirmed the alarm. La Molte had Motte was calling loudly for assistance, wKca 
little doubt that the officers oi )\\s{\c(i had at Peter entered Y«\l\\V\^\\\s, wcvCk. <i:\<!»Qiwvi\c<i >Jwci 



40 Tim ROMAXCE OF THE FOREST. 

hall filled with men, nnd his young mUtrcss Montalt, for that w&s the title of the noble 

senseless upon the floor. stranger. 

A chevalier now advanced, and soliciting " My chief residence," said the Marquis, 

pardon of Madame for the rudeness of his "is in' a distant province, but I have a ch&- 

conduct, was attempting an apology, when, teau near the borders of the forest, and in 

perceiving Adeline, he hastened to raise her returning from an excursion I have been 

from the ground ; but I^uis, who now re- benight«l and lost my way. A light which 

turned, caught her in his arms and desired gleamed through the trees attracted me 

the stranger not to interfere. hither, and such was the darkness without 

The person to whom he spoke this wore the that I did not know it proceeded from the 

star of one of the first orders in France, and abbey till I came to the door." 

had an air of dignity which declared him to The noble deportment of the strangers, the 

be of superior rank. He appeared to be splendour of their apparel, and, above all, 

about forty, but perhnps tlie spirit and fire of this speech, dissipated ever>' remaining doubt 

his countenance made the impression of time of Madame's, and she was giving orders for 

upon his features less perceptible. His soft- refreshment to be set before them when La 

ened asjx^ct and insinuating manners, while, Motte, who had listened, and was now con- 

regnrdlcss of himself, he seemed attentive vinced he had nothing to fear, entered the 

only to tlie condition of Adeline, gradually apartment. 

dissipated the apprehensions of Madame I^i He advanced towards the Marquis with a 

Motte, and sulxlucd the sudden resentment of complacent air, but, as he would have spoke, 

Ix>uis. U])un Adeline, who was yet insen- the words of welcome faltered on his lips, his 

sihle, he gazed with an eager admiration limbs trembled, and a ghastly paleness over- 

which seemed to absorb all tlie faculties of spread his countenance. The Marquis was 

his mind. She was indwd an object not to little less agitated, and, in the first moment 

be contemplated with indifference. of surprise, put his hand upon his sword, but. 

Her l)cauty, touched with the languid deli- recollecting himsc^, he withdrew it, and en- 

cjicv of illness, gained from sentiment what it deavoured to obtain a command of features, 

lost in bloom. Tlie negligence of her dress, A pause of agonising silence ensued. I-A 

hioscned for the purpose of freer ri'spiration, Motte made some motion towards the door, 

disoovcMvd the graces which her anburn tresses, but his agitated frame refused to support him, 

that fell ill profusion over her bosom, shaded, and he sunk into a chair, silent and exhausted, 

but could not conceal. The horror of his countenance, together with 

There now entered nnothcr stranger, a his whole behaviour, excited the utmost sur- 

young chevalier, who, having spoken hastily prise in Madame, whose eyes inquired of the 

to the elder, joined the general group that Marquis more than he thoupht proper to 

surrounded .Xdeline. He was of a person in answer ; his looks increased mstead of ex- 

wliieh eleganee was happily Mended with plaining tlie mysteiy, and expressed a mix- 

.streufith, and had a countenance animated, ture of emotions which she could not analyse, 

but not haughty; noble, yet expressive of pecu- Meanwhile she endeavoured to soothe and 

liar swiftness. What rendered it at present revive her husband, but he repressed her 

most interebiingwastheconiixnssion he seemed efforts, and, averting his face, covered it wiUi 

to lerl for Adeline, who now revived, and saw his hands. 

pre- 




, , w , startmg ..^ ^ ^ 

iH" tUe stranger she had seen in the forest, air, called on him to return. The Marquis 

Her countenance instantly changed to the looked b.ick and stopped, but still hesiUited 

paleness (»f terror when she observed the whether to proceed ; the supplications of 

room erowdeil with jH^ple. Louis now sup- Adeline, who was now returned, added to 

ported her into another apartment, where the those of La Motte, determined him, and he 

two chevaliers, who followed her. again a polo- sat down. 

gised for the alarm they had occasioned. "I reciuest of you, my lord," said I-a 

i He elder, turning to Madame I^i Motte, Motte, "that we may converse for a Usvt 

*^' , ^, moments by ourselves." 

> on are no doubt, madam, ignorant that "The request is bold, and the indulgence, 

1 am the pro]>rietor of this abbey." She perhaps, dangerous," xiid the Marquis; "it 

starletl. "\\^. „ot alarmed, madam, you is more also than I will grant. You can have 

me safe and welcome. This ruinous sjwt has nothing to say with which your familv are 

iMvn long aban(lone<l bv me, and if it has not acquainted— speak your purpose and be 

aflordtMl you a shelter. 1 iun happy." brief." 

M.iilanx* I .a Motte exi^re-jsed her gratitude L;i Motte's complexion varied to every scn- 

tortlus rniulcsccnsufi), and Louis decUwed his tence of his speech, 
j'-vjstc ol the iHjlUcncss of ibo Man\uis Ae " VmY*o^\\AQ,w\^ Vatdl" said he; "mylipa 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREsT. 



shall close for ever, ere they pronounce before 
^nothcr human being the words reserved for 
you alone. I entreat, I supplicate of you a 
few moments' private discourse." 

As he pronounced these words, tears welled 
into his eyes, and the Marquis, softened by 
his distress, consented, though with evident 
emotion and reluctance, to his request. 

La Motte took a light and led the Marquis 
to a small room in a remote part of the edifice, 
where they remained near an hour. Madame, 
alarmed by Uie length of their absence, went 
in quest of them ; as she di*ew near, a curi- 
osity, in such circumstances, perhaps, not 
unjustifiable, prompted her to listen. 

La Motte just then exclaimed, "The frenzy 
of despair I ' Some words followed, delivered 
in a low tone, which she could not under- 
stand. "I have suffered more than I can 
express," continued he; "the same image 
has pursued me in my midnight dream, and 
in my daily wanderings. There is no punish- 
ment short of death which I would not have 
endured to r^;ain the stite of mind with which 
I entered this forest. I again address my- 
self to jOMX compassion." 

A loud gust of wind that burst along the 
passage where Madame La Motte stood 
overpowered his voice and that of the Mar- 
quis, who spoke in reply ; but she soon after 
distinguished these words — " To-morrow, my 
lord, if you return to these ruins, I will lead 
you to the spot." 

• ' That is scarcely necessary, and may be 
dangerous," said the Marquis. 

' • From yovt^ my lord, I can excuse these 
doubts," resumed La Motte, "but I will 
swear whatever you shall propose. Yes," con- 
tinued he, "whatever may the consequence, 
I will swear to submit to your decree ! " 

The rising tempest again droNvned the 
soimd of their voices, and Madame La Motte 
vainly endeavoured to hear those words upon 
which probably hung the explanation of this 
mysterious conduct. They now moved to- 
wards the door, and she retreated with preci- 
pitation to the apartment whore she had 
left Adeline with Louis and the young 
dievalier. 

Hither the Marquis and La Motte soon 
followed — the first haughty and cool, the 
latter somewhat more composed than Ixifore, 
though the impression of horror was not yet 
Caidea from his countenance. The Marquis 
passed on to the hall, where his retinue 
awaited ; the storm had not yet subsided, 
but he seemed impatient to be gone, and 
ordered his people to be in readiness. La 
Motte observed a sullen silence, frequently 
pacing the room with hasty stops, and was 
sometimes lost in reverie. Meanwhile, the 
Marquis, sealing himself by Adeline, directed 
to her his whole attention, except when sud- 
den fits of absence came over his mind and 
suspended him in silence; nt these \\m^ the 



young chevalier ad<Ircssed Adeline, who, 
with diffidence and some agitation, shrunk 
from the observance of lx)th. 

The Marquis had been near two hours at 
the abl)ey, and the tempest still continuing 
Madame I^i Motte offerctl him a bed. A look 
from her husband made her tremble for the 
consequence. Her offer, however, was politely 
declined, the Marquis Ixring evidently as im- 
patient to 1x5 gone as his tenant appeared 
distressed by his presence. He often returned 
to the hall, and from the gates raiscrl a look 
of impatience to the clouds. Nothing was to 
be seen through the darknessof night — nothing 
heard but the howling of the storm. 

The morning dawnerl l>efore he dopartetl. 
As he was preparing to leave the abbey, I-a 
Motte again drew him a.side, and held him for 
a few moments in close conversation. His 
impassioned gestures, which Madame I^a 
Motte observed from a remote part of the 
room, added to her curiosity a degree of wild 
apprehension derived from the obscurity of 
the subject. Her endeavour to distinguish 
the corresponding words was baffled by the 
low voice m which they were uttered. 

The Marquis and his retinue at length de- 
parted, and La Motte, having himself fastened 
the broken gates, silently and dejectedly 
withdrew to his chamljor. The moment they 
were alone, Madame seized the oj)portunity of 
entreating her husband to explain the scene 
she had witnessed. 

"Ask me no questions," said La Motte, 
sternly, "for I will answer none. I have 
alreacly forbade yoiu* speaking to me on this 
subject." 

" What subject?" said his wife. 

La Motte seemed to recollect himself. " No 
matter ; I was mistaken ; I thought you had 
repeated these questions before." 

"Ah!" said Madame I^-i Motte, "it is 
then as I suspected ; your former melancholy 
and the distress of this night have the same 
cause." 

"And why should you either suspect or 
inquire ? Ami always to be persecuted with 
conjectures?" 

" Pardon me, I meant not to persecute 
you ; but my anxiety for your welfare will not 
suffer me to rest under this dreadful un- 
certainty. I^t me claim the privilege of a 
wife, and share the affliction which oppresses 
you. Deny me not " 

1^1 Motte interrupted her. ""N^Hiatever may 
be the cause of the emotions which you have 
witnessed, I swear that I will not now reveal 
it. A time may come when I shall no longer 
judge concealment necqssary ; till then be 
silent, and desist from importunity ; above all, 
forbear to remark to anyone what you may 
have seen uncommon m me. Bury your 
surmise in your own bosom, as you wouli avoid 
my curse and my destruction.' ' TVvt^'tVfeTKvvwcA 
air with which \ie sp6VL& l\v\s, v<>k^& \i\^ <:»\«k.- 



43 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



tcnance was overspread with a livid hue, made 
his wife shudder ; and she forbore all reply. 

Madame La Mottc retired to bed, but not 
to rest. She ruminated on the past occurrence ; 
and her surprise and curiosity concerning the 
words and behaviour of her husband, were 
but more strongly stimulated by reflection. 
One truth, however, appeared ; she could not 
doubt but the mysterious conduct of La Motte, 
which had for so many months oppressed her 
with anxiety, and the late scene with the 
Marquis, originated from the same cause. 
This belief, which seemed to prove how un- 
justly she had suspected Adeline, brought 
with it a pang of self-accusation. She looked 
for\vard to the morrow, which would lead the 
Marquis again to the abbey, with impatience. 

Wearied nature at length resumed her 
rights, and yielded a short oblivion of care. 

At a late hour the next day the family 
assembled to breakfast. Each individual of 
the party appeared silent and abstracted, but 
very different was the aspect of their features, 
and still more the complexion of their 
thoughts. I>a Motte seemed agitated by 
impatient fear, yet the suUenness of despair 
overspread his countenance. A certain wild- 
ness in his eye at times expressed the sudden 
start of horror, and again his features would 
sink into the gloom of despondence. 

Madame I^ Motte seemed harassed with 
anxiety ; she watched ever>' turn of her hus- 
band's countenance, and impatiently awaited 
the arrival of the Marquis. Louis was com- 
posed and thoughtful. Adeline seemed to 
feel her full share of uneasiness. She 
had observed the behaviour of La Motte 
on the preceding night with nuich surprise, 
and the happy confidence she had hitherto 
reposed in him was shaken. She feared, also, 
lest the exigency of his circumstances should 
precipitate him again into the world, and that 
he would be either unable or unwilling to 
aiford her a shelter beneath his roof. 

During breakfast La Motte frequently rose 
to the window, from whence he cast many 
an anxious look. His wife understood too 
well the cause of his impatience, and en- 
deavoured to repress her own. In these 
intervals Louis attempted by whispers to 
obtain some information from his father, but 
La Motte always returned to the table, where 
the presence of Adeline prevented further 
discourse. 

After breakfast, as he walked upon the lawn, 
Louis would have joined him, but La Motte 
peremptorily declared he intended to be alone, 
and soon after, the Marquis being not yet 
arrived, proceeded to a greater distance from 
the abbey. 

Adeline retired into their usual working- 
room with Madame I^ Motte, who affected 
an air of cheerfulness and even of kindness. 
Feeling the necessity of offering some reason 
/or the striking agitation of La Motte, and 



of preventing the surprise which the unex- 
pected appearance of the Marquis would 
occasion Adeline if she was left to connect it 
with his behaviour of the preceding night, 
she mentioned that the Marquis and La 
Motte had long been known to each other, 
and that this unexpected meeting, after an 
absence of many years, and under circum- 
stances so altered and humiliating on the part 
of the latter, had occasioned him much pain- 
ful emotion. This had been heightened by a 
consciousness that the Marquis had formerly 
misinterpreted some circumstances in his con- 
duct towards him, which had caused a suspen- 
sion of their intimacy. 

This account did not bring conviction to 
the mind of Adeline, for it seemed inadequate 
to the degree of emotion the Marquis and leA 
Motte had mutually betrayed. Her surprise 
was excited and her curiosity awaken^' by 
the words which were meant to dehide ihcm 
both, but she forbore to express her thoughts. 

Madame, proceeding with her plan, said, 
"the Marquis was now expected, atnd she 
hoped whatever differences remaineid would 
be perfectly adjusted." 

Adeline blushed, and endeavouring to re- 
ply, her lips faltered. Conscious of this 
agitation, and of the observance of Madame 
La Motte, her confusion increased, and her 
endeavours to suppress served only to heighten 
it. Still she tried to renew the discourse, and 
still she found it impossible to collect her 
thoughts. Shocked lest Madame should ap- 
l)rehend the sentiment which had till this 
moment been concealed almost from hcrs'jlf, 
her colour fled, she fixed her eyes on the 
ground, and for some time found it difficult 
to respire. Madame La Motte inquired f 
she was ill, when Adeline, glad of the excuse. 
withdrew to the indulgence of her own 
thoughts, which were now wholly engrossed 
by the expectation of seeing again the young 
chevalier who had accompanied the Marquis. 

As she looked from her room she saw the 
Marquis on horseback, with several attend- 
ants, advancing at a distance, and she has- 
tened to apprise Madame I^ Motte of his 
approach. In a short time he arrived at the 
gates, and Madame and I^ouis went out to 
receive him. La Motte being not yet returned. 
He entered the hall, followed by the young 
chevalier, and accosting Madame with a sort 
of stately politeness, inquired for La Motte, 
whom Ix)uis now went to seek. 

The Marquis remained for a few minutes 
silent, and then asked of Madame La Mottei 
" how her fair daughter did?" 

Madame understood it was Adeline he 
meant, and having answered his inquiry, and 
slightly said that she was not related to her, 
Adeline, upon some indication of the Mar- 
quis's wish, was sent for; she entered the 
room with a modest blush and a timid air, 
wVilch se^mc^Oi Xo etvg,a^e all his attention 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



43 



His compliments she received with a sweet 
grace ; but when the younger chevnlier ap- 
proached, the warmth of his manner rendered 
hers involuntarily more reserved, and slic 
scarcely dared to raise her eyes from the 
ground, lest they should encounter his. 

La Motte now entered and apologised for 
his absence, which the Marquis noticed only 
by a slight inclination of his head, expressing 
at the same time b^ his looks both distrust 
and pride. They immediately quitted the 
abbey together, and the Mai-quis beckoned 
his attendants to follow at a distance. La 
Motte forbade his son to accompany him, but 
Louis obsCTved he took the way into the 
thickest part of the forest. He was lost in a 
chaos of conjecture concerning this affair, 
but curiosity and anxiety for his father in- 
duced him to follow at some distance. 

In the meantime the younger stranger, 
whom the Marquis had addressed by the 
name of Theodore, remained at the abbey 
wi{h Madame La Motte and Adeline. The 
former, with all her address, could not con- 
c^ her agitation during this interval. She 
moved involuntarily to the door whenever 
she heard a footstep, and several times she 
went to the hall-door in order to look into the 
forest, but as often returned, checked by dis- 
appointment. No person appeared. Theo- 
dore seemed to address as much of his 
attention to Adeline as politeness would 
allow him te withdraw from Madame La 
Motte. His manners, so gentle, yet dignified, 
insensibly subdued her timidity, and banished 
her reserve. Her conversation no longer 
suffered a painful constraint, but gradually 
disclosed the beauties of her mind, and 
seemed to produce a mutual confidence. \ 
similarity of- sentiment soon appeared, and 
Theodore, by the impatient pleasure which 
animated his countenance, seemed frequently 
to anticipate the thoughts of Adeline. 

To them the absence of the Marquis was 
short, tiiough long to Madame La Motte, 
whose countenance brightened when she 
beard the tramping of horses at the gate. 

The Marquis appeared but for a moment, 
and passed on with La Motte to a private 
room, where they remained for some time in 
conference, immediately after which he de- 
parted. Theodore took leave of Adeline, 
who, as well as La Motte and Madame, 
attended them to the gate with an expression 
of tender regret, and often, as he went, 
looked back upon the abbey till the inter- 
vening branches entirely excluded it from his 
view. 

The transient glow of pleasure diffused 
over the cheek of Adeline disappeared with 
the young stranger, and she sighed as she 
turned into the hall. The image of Theodore 
pursued her to her chamber ; she recollected 
with exactness every particular of his late 
conversation — his sentiments so congenial 



with her own — his manners so engaging — 
his countenance so animntud, so ingenuous 
and so noble, in which manlv dignity was 
blended with the sweetness o( Ixmevolcnce ; 
— these and every other grace she recollected, 
and a soft melancholy stole uj)on her heart. 
" I shall see him no more," said she. A 
sigh that followed told her more of her heart 
than she wished to know. She blushed and 
sighed again, and then, suddenly recollecting 
herself, she endeavoured to divert her 
thoughts to a different subj'xt. I.A Motte's 
connection with the Marquis for some lime 
engaged her attention ; but, unable to de- 
velop the mystery that attendetl it, she 
sought a refuge for her own reflections in 
the more pleasing ones to be derived from 
books. 

During this time I^uis, shocked and sur- 
prised at the extreme distress which his 
father had manifested upon the first appear- 
ance of the Marquis, addressed him on the 
subject. He had no doubt that the Marquis 
was intimately concerned in the event which 
made it necessary for I^ Motte to leave 
Paris, and he spoke his thoughts without 
disguise, lamenting at the same time the 
unlucky chance which had brought him to 
seek refuge in a place of all others the least 
capable of affording it- the estate of his 
enemy. La Motte did not contradict this 
opinion of his son's, and joined in lamenting 
the evil fate which had conducted him 
thither. 

The term of Ix)uis' absence from his 
regiment was now nearly expired, and he 
took occasion to express his sorrow that he 
must soon be obliged to leave his father in 
circumstances so dangerous as the present. 
"I should leave you, sir, with less pain," 
continued he, " were I sure I knew the full 
extent of your misfortunes. At present I am 
left to conjecture evils which perhaps do not 
exist. Relieve me, sir, from this state of 
painful uncertainty, and suffer me to prove 
myself worthy of your confidence." 

" I have already answered you on this 
subject," said La Motte, "and forbade you 
to renew it. I am now obliged to tell you I 
care not how soon you depart, if I am to be 
persecuted with these inquiries." La Motte 
walked abruptly away, and left his son to 
doubt and concern." 

The arrival of the Marquis had dissipated 
the jealous fears of Madame La Motte, and 
she awoke to a sense of her cnielly towards 
Adeline. When she considered her orphan 
state — the uniform affection which had ap- 
peared in her behaviour — the mildness and 
patience with which she had borne her in- 
jurious treatment, she was shocked, and took 
an early opportunity of renewing her former 
kindness. But she could not explain this 
seeming inconsistency of conduct withovxt. bsi.- 
traying hex Yale sv!isp\Q\QT\s, \i\C\Oa ^^ ^'^^h 



44 



THE ROMAl^CE OF THE FOREST, 



blushed to remember, nor could she apologise 
for her former behaviour without giving this 
explanation. 

iShe contented herself, therefore, with ex- 
pressing in her manner the regard which was 
thus revived. Adeline was at first surprised, 
but she felt too much pleasure at the change 
to Ixj scrupulous in inquiring the cause. 

But notwithstanding the satisfaction which 
Adeline received from the revival of Madame 
\j\ Motte's kindness, her thoughts fre- 
cjucntly recurred to the peculiar and forlorn 
circumstances of her condition. She could 
not help feeling less confidence than she had 
formerly done in the friendship of Madame 
I-,a Mottc, whose character now appeared 
less amiable than her imagination had repre- 
sented it, anrl seemed strongly tinctured with 
caprice. Her thoughts often dwelt upon the 
stmnge introduction of the Manjuis at the 
ablx-'y, and on the mutual emotions and 
apparent dislike of La Mottc and himself ; 
and, under those circumstances, it ccjually 
excited her sur])risc that La Mottc should 
choose, and that the Marquis should jxirmit 
him, to remain in his territory. 

Her mind returned the oftcncr, perhaps, to 
this subject, because it was connected with 
Theodore ; but it returned imconscious of 
the idea which attracted it. She attributed 
the interest she felt in the affair to her 
anxiety for the welfare of I-,a Mottc, and for 
her own future destination, which was now 
so deeply involved in his. Sonn'times, 
indctid, she caught herself busy in con- 
jecture as to the degree of relationship in 
which Theodore stood to the Manpiis, but 
she immediately checked her thoughts, anrl 
severely blamed herself for having suffered 
them to stray to an object which she per- 
ceived was too dangerous to her peace. 



CIL\PTER VIL 

Present ills 
Arc less than horrible imaginings. 

SlIAKSI'KARE. 

A FEW days after the occurrence related in 
the preceding chapter, as Adeline sat alone in 
her chamber, she was roused from a reverie 
by a tnimj)ing of horses near the gate, and, 
on looking from the casement, she saw the 
Maniuis de Montalt enter the abl)cy. This 
circumstance surprised her, and an emotion, 
whose CiUise she did not trouble herself to 
inquire for, made her instantly retreat from 
the window. The same cause, however, led 
her thither again as hastily, but the object of 
her search did not appear, and she was in no 
haste to retire. 

As she stood musing and disappointed the 
Marquis came out with La Motte, and, imme- 
(Vmtcly looking up, miw Adeline and bowed. 
S/ic returned his compliment respectfully and 



withdrew from the wiadow, vexed at having 
been seen there. They went into the forest, 
but the Marquis's attendants di4 not, as 
before, follow them thither. When they re- 
turned, which was not till after a considerable 
time, the Marquis immediately mounted his 
horse and rode away. 

For the remainder of the day La Motte 
apix^ared gloomy and silent, and was fre- 
quently lost in thought. Adeline observed 
him with particular attention and concern ; 
she perceived that he was always more melan- 
choly after an interview with the Marquis, and 
was now surprised to hear that the latter had 
appointed to dine the next day at the abb^. 

When }ja. Motte mentioned this he added 
some high eulogium on the character of the 
Marquis, and particularly praised his gene- 
rosity and nobleness of soul. At this instant 
Adeline recollected the anecdotes she had 
formerly heard concerning the abbey, and 
they thrcAv a shadow over the brightness of 
that excellence which La Motte now cele- 
brated. The account, however, did not 
ap])ear to deserve much credit, a part of it, 
as far as a negative will admit of demonstra- 
tion, having been already proved false ; for it 
had been reported that the abbey was haunted, 
and no supernatural appearance had ever been 
observed by the present inhabitants. 

Adeline, however, ventured to inquire 
whether it was the present Marquis of whom 
those injurious reports had becr^aised? 

La Motte answered her wth a smile of ridi- 
cule : ' ' Stories of ghosts and hobgoblins have 
always l)een admired and cherished by the 
vulgar," said he. " I am inclined to rely 
ui)on my own experience at least as muctk 
as upon the accounts of these peasants. If 
you have seen anything to corroborate these 
accounts, pray inform me of it, that I may 
establish my faith." 

"You mistake me, sir," said she, "it was 
not concerning supernatural agency that I 
would inr|uire ; I alluded to a different part 
of the report, which hinted that some person 
had been confined here by order of the Mar- 
quis, who was said to have died unfairly. 
This was alleged as a reason for the Mar- 
quis's having abandoned the abbey." 

"All the mere coinage of idleness," said 
IjCl Motte— "a romantic tale to excite won- 
der : to see the Marquis is alone sufficient to 
refute this ; and if we credit half the number 
of those stories that spring from the same 
source we prove ourselves little superior to 
the simpletons who invent them. Your good 
sense, Adeline, I think, will teach you the 
merit of disbelief." 

Adeline blushed and was silent ; but Ija, 
Motte's defence of the Manjuis appeared 
much warmer and mofe diffuse than was 
consistent with his own disi>osition or re- 
quired by the occasion. His former con- 
veT^^liou vf \x\i LA\]ds QQcurred to her, and she 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



45 



was the more surprised at what passed at 
present. 

She looked forward to the morrow with a 
mixture of pain and pleasure, the expectation 
of seeing agiain the young chevalier occupying 
her thoughts and agitating them with a various 
emotion. Now she feared his presence, and 
now she doubted whether he would conic. 
At length she observed this, and blushed to 
find how much he engaged her attention. 

The morrow arrived. The Marquis came — 
but he came alone ; and the sunshine of 
Adeline's mind was clouded, though she was 
able to wear her usual air of cheerfulness. 
The Marquis was polite, affable, and atten- 
tive ; to manners the most easy and elegant 
was ^ded the refinement of polished life. 
His conversation was lively, amusing, some- 
times even witty, and discovered great know- 
ledge of the world, or, what is often mistaken 
for it, an acquaintance with the higher circles, 
and with the topics of the day. 

Here La Motte was also qualified to con- 
verse with him, and they entered into a dis- 
cussion of the characters and manners of the 
age with great spirit and some humour. 
Madame I^ Motte had not seen her husband 
so cheerful since they left Paris, and some- 
times she could almost fancy she was there. 
Adeline listened till the cheerfulness which 
she had at first only assumed became real. 
The address of the Marquis was so insinua- 
ting and affable that her reserve insensibly 
gave way before it, and her natural vivacity 
resumed its long-lost empire. 

At parting, the Marquis told La Motte he 
rejoiced at having found so agreeable a neigh- 
bour. La Motte bowed. " I shall sometimes 
visit you," continued he, "and I lament that 
I cannot at present invite Madame La Motte 
and her fair friend to my chateau, but it is 
undergoing some repairs, which make it but 
on uncomfortable residence." 

The vivacity of La Motte disappeared with 
his guest, and he soon relapsed into fits of 
silence and abstraction. 

"The Marquis is a very agreeable man," 
said Madame La Motte. 

" Very agreeable," replied he. 

"And seems to have an excellent heart," 
she resumed. 

"An excellent one," said La Motte. 

"You seem discomposed, my dear ; what 
has disturbed you ? " 

" Not in the least. I was only thinking that 
with such agreeable talents, and such an ex- 
cellent heart, it was a pity the Marquis 
should " 

"What, my dear?" said Madame with 
impatience. 

"That the Marquis should — should suffer 
this abbey to fall into ruins," replied La 
Motte. 

"Is that all I" said Madame with dis- 
appointment 



" That is all, upon my honour," said Ia 
Motte, and left the room. 

Adeline's spirits, no longer supported by tlie 
animated conversation of the Marquis, sunk 
into languor, and when he dei>arted she 
walked pensively into the forest. She followed 
a little romantic path that wound along the 
margin of the stream, and was overhung with 
deep shades. The tranquillity of the scene, 
which autumn now touched with her sweetest 
tints, softened her mind to a tender kind of 
melancholy, and she suffered a tear which, she 
knew not wherefore, had stolen into her eye, to 
tremble there unchecked. She came to a 
lonely recess, formed by high trees ; the wind 
sighed mournfully among the branches, and 
as it waved their lofty heads scattered their 
leaves to the ground. She seated herself on 
a Ixink beneath, and indulged the melancholy 
reflections that pressed to her mind. 

"Oh, could I dive into futurity and behold 
the events which await me!" said she, "I 
should perhaps, by constant contemplation, 
be enabled to meet them with fortitude. An 
orphan in this wide world — thrown upon the 
friendship of strangers for comfort, and upon 
their bounty for the very means of existence 
— what but evil have I to expect ! Alas, my 
father ! how could you thus abandon your 
child — how leave her to the storms of life — 
to sink perhaps beneath them ? Alas, I have 
no friend ! " 

She was interrupted by a rustling among the 
fallen leaves ; she turned her head, and per- 
ceiving the Marquis's young friend, arose to 
depart. 

"Pardon this intrusion," said he, "your 
voice attracted me hither, and your words de- 
tained me. My offence, however, brings with 
it its own punishment ; having learned your 
sorrows — how can I help feeling them myself? 
Would that my sympathy, or my suffering, 
could rescue you from them 1 " He hesitat^. 
" Would that I could deserve the title of your 
friend, and be thought worthy of it by 
yourself 1 " 

The confusion of Adeline's thoughts would 
scarcely permit her to reply ; she trembled, 
and gently withdrew her hand, which he had 
taken while he spoke. 

"You have perhaps heard, sir, more than 
is true : I am indeed not happy, but a moment 
of dejection has made me unjust, and I am 
less unfortunate than 1 have represented. 
When I said I had no friend, I was ungrateful 
to the kindness of Monsieur and Madame La 
Motte, who have been more than friends — 
have been as parents to me." 

"If so, I honour them," cried Theodore 
with warmth ; " and if I did not feel it to be 
presumption, I would ask why you are 

unhappy? But " He paused. Adeline, 

raising her eyes, saw him gazing upon her 
with intense and eager anxiety, and Ket VookVs* 
were again fixed upo\i xYi^ ^Q>Mivi, ^ ' \ \a:4^ 



46 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



pained you," said Theodore, "by an improper 
request. Can you forgive me, and also when 
I add that it was an interest in your welfare 
which urged my inquiry?" 

' ' Forgiveness, sir, it is unnecessary to ask. 
I am certainly obliged by the compassion 
you express. But the evening is cold ; if you 
please, we will walk towards the abbey." 

As they moved on, Theodore was for some 
time silent. At length, "It was but lately 
that I solicited your pardon," said he, "and 
I shall now, perhaps, have need of it again ; 
but you will do me the justice to believe that 
I have a strong, and, indeed, a pressing 
reason, to inquire how nearly you are related 
to Monsieur La Motte." 

" We are not at all related," said Adeline ; 
" but the service he has done me I can never 
repay, and I hope my gratitude will teach rae 
never to forget it." 

" Indeed ! " said Theodore, surprised ; "and 
may I ask how long vou have known 
him?" 

" Rather, sir, let me ask, why these ques- 
tions should be necessary? " 

"You are just," said he, with an air of 
self-condemnation; "my conduct has de- 
served this reproof ; I should have been more 
explicit." 

He looked as if his mind was labouring 
with something which he was unwilling to 
express. 

" But you know not how delicately I am 
circumstanced," continued he, "yet I will 
aver that my questions are prompted by the 
tenderest interest in your happiness, and even 
by my fears for your safety." 

Adeline started. 

" I fear you are deceived," said he ; " I fear 
there's danger near you." 

Adeline stopped, and, looking earnestly at 
him, begged he would explain himself. She 
suspected that some mischief threatened La 
Motte, and, Theodore continuing silent, she 
repeated her request. 

" If La Motte is concerned in this danger," 
said she, "let me entreat you to acquaint 
him with it immediately. He has but too 
many misfortunes to apprehend." 

" Excellent Adeline I " cried Theodore, 
"that heart must be adamant that would 
injure you. How shall I hint what I fear is 
too true, and how forbear to warn you of 
your danger without " 

He was interrupted by a step among the 
trees, and presently after saw La Motte cross 
into the path they were in. Adeline felt con- 
fused at being thus seen with the chevalier, 
and was hastening to join La Motte, but 
Theodore detained her, and entreated a mo- 
ment's attention. 

" There is now no time to explain myself," 
said he, "yet what I would say is of the 
utmost consequence to yourself. Promise, 
therefore, to meet njc in some pari of lYie 



forest at about this time to-morrow evening ; 
you will then, I hope, be convinced that my 
conduct is directed neither by common cir- 
cumstances nor common regard." 

Adeline shuddered at the idea of making 
an appointment. She hesitated, and at length 
entreated Theodore not to delay till to-mor- 
row an explanation which app^ired to be so 
important, but to follow La Motte and in- 
fonn liim of his danger immediately. 

" It is not with La Motte I would speak." 
replied Theodore ; "I know of no danger 
that threatens him — ^but he approaches — be 
quick, lovely Adeline, and promise to meet 
me." 

"I do promise," said Adeline, in a falter- 
ing voice ; " I will come to the spot whoe 
you found me this evening, an hour eariier 
to-morrow." 

Saying this she withdrew her trembling 
hand, which Theodore had pressed to his 
lips in token of acknowledgment, and he 
immediately disappeared. 

La Motte now approached Adeline, who, 
fearing that he had seen Theodore, was in 
some confusion. 

" Whither is Louis gone so fast ? " said La 
Motte. 

She rejoiced to find his mistake, and suf- 
fered him to remain in it. They walked pen- 
sively towards the abbey, where Adeline, too 
much occupied by her own thoughts to bear 
company, retired to her chambCT. She ru- 
minated upon the words of Theodore, and 
the ]iiore she considered them the more she 
was ])erplexed. Sometimes she blamed her- 
self for having made an appointment, doubt- 
ing \\hether he had not solicited it for the 
purpose of pleading a passion ; and now 
delicacy checked this thought, and made her 
vexed that she presumed upon having in- 
spired one. She recoUectetl the serious 
earnestness of his voice and manner, when 
he entreated her to meet him ; and, as they 
convinced her of the importance of the sub- 
ject, she shuddered at a danger which she 
could not comprehend, looking forward to 
the moiTow with anxious impatience. 

Sometimes, too, a remembrance of the 
tender interest he had expressed for her 
welfare, and of his correspondent look and 
air, would steal across her memory, awaken- 
ing a pleasing emotion and a latent hope that 
she was not indifferent to him. From reflec- 
tions like these she was roused by a summons 
to supper. The repast was a melancholy 
one, it being the last evening of Louis's stay 
at the abbey. Adeline, who esteemed him, 
regretted his departure, while his eyes were 
often bent on her with a look which seemed 
to express that he was about to leave the 
object of his affection. She endeavoiwed, by 
her cheerfulness, to reanimate the whole 
])arty, and especially Madame La Motte, 
\\\\o ii"C<.\vx<iXi\.V^ sl\ed tears. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



47 



*' We shall soon meet again," said Ade- 
line ; " I trust in happier circumstances." 

La Motte sighed. The countenance of 
Louis brightened at her words. 

*• Do you wish it?" said he, with peculiar 
emphasis. 

" Most certainly I do," she replied ; " can 
you doubt my regard for my best friends ? " 

" I cannot doubt anything that is good of 
you," said he. 

*• You forget you have left Paris," said I^ 
Motte to his son, while a faint smile, crossed 
his face ; " such a compliment would there be 
in character with the place — in these solitary 
woods it is quite outre." 

" The language of admiration is not always 
that of compliment, sir," said Louis. 

Adeline, willing to change the discourse, 
asked to what part of France he was going. 
He replied that his regiment was now at 
Peronne, and he should go immediately 
thither. After some mention of indifferent 
subjects, the family withdrew for the night to 
their several chambers. 

The approaching departure of her son occu- 
pied the thoughts of Madame La Motte, and 
she appeared at breakfast with eyes swollen 
with weeping. The pale countenance of 
Louis seemed to indicate that he had rested 
no better than his mother. When breakfast 
was over Adeline retired for awhile, that she 
might not interrupt by her presence their 
last conversation. As she walked on the 
lawn before the abbey she returned in thought 
to the occurrence of yesterday evening, and 
her impatience for the appointed interview 
increased. She was soon joined by Louis. 

" It was unkind of you to leave us," said 
he, " in the last moments of my stay. Could 
I hope that you would sometimes remember 
me when I am far away,- I should depart 
with less sorrow." 

He then expressed his concern at leaving 
ber, and, though he had hitherto armed him- 
self with resolution to forbear a direct avowal 
of an attachment which must be fruitless, his 
heart now yielded to the force of passion, and 
hs told what Adeline every moment feared to 
hear. 

" This declaration," said Adeline, endea- 
vouring to overcome the agitation it excited, 
*' gives me inexpressible concern." 

** Oh, say not so ! " interrupted Louis, 
" but give me some slender hope to support 
me in the miseries of absence. Say that you 

do not hate me — say " 

"That I do most readily say," replied 
Adeline in a tremulous voice ; " if it will give 
you pleasure to be assured of my esteem and 
friendship, receive this assurance : as the son 
of my best benefactors, you are entitled 

to " 

"Name not benefits," said Louis, "your 
merits outrun them all ; and suffer me to 
hope for a sentimeiit loss cool than that of 



friendship, as well as to believe tliat I do not 
owe your approbation of me to the actions of 
others. I have long borne my jxission in 
silence, because I foresaw the difhculties that 
would attend it — nay, I have even dared to 
endeavour to overcome it ; I have dared to 
believe it possible —forgive the supposition — 
that I could forget you — and " 

"You distress me," interrupted Adeline; 
"this is a conversation which I ought not to 
hear. I am al)Ove disguise, and therefon^ 
assure you thjit, though your virtues will 
always command my esteem, you have 
nothing to hope for my love. Were it even 
otherwise, our circumstances would effec- 
tually decide for us. If you are really my 
friend, you will rejoice that I am spared the 
struggle between affection and prudence. I^t 
me hope also that time will teach you to 
reduce love within the limits of friendship." 

" Never !" cried I-K)uis vehemently ; " were 
this possible my passion would Ix; unworthy 
of its object." While he spoke Adelines 
favourite fawn came towards her. This cir- 
cumstance affected Louis even to tears. 
"This little animal," said he, after a short 
pause, "first conducted me to you ; it was a 
witness to that happy moment when I first 
saw you, surrounded by attractions too power- 
ful for my heart ; that moment is now fresh 
in my memory, and the creature comes even 
to witness this sad one of my departure." 
Grief intemipted his utterance. 

When he recovered his voice, he said, 
"Adeline ! when you look upon your little 
favourite and caress it, remember the unhappy 
Louis, who will then be far, far from you. 
Do not deny me the poor consolation of be- 
lieving this 1" 

" I shall not require such a monitor," said 
Adeline, with a smile ; "your excellent parents 
and your own merits have sufficient claim 
upon my remembrance. Could I see your 
natural good sense resume its influence over 
passion, my satisfaction would equal my es- 
teem for you." 

"Do not hope," said Louis, "nor will I 
wish it — for passion here is virtue." As he 
sj^oke, he saw La Motte turn round an angle 
of the abbey. " The moments are precious," 
said he ; " I am interrupted. Oh ! Adeline, 
farewell ! and say that you will sometimes 
think of me." 

" Farewell," said Adeline, who was affected 
by his distress, ' ' farewell 1 and peace 
attend you. I will think of you with the 
affection of a sister." 

He sighed deeply, and pressed her hand ; 
when La Motte, winding round another pro- 
jection of the niin, again appeared. Adeline 
left them together, and withdrew to her 
chamber, oppressed by the scene. Louis's 
passion and her esteem were too sincere not 
to inspire her with a stronc; dc^^^ oil ^\V^ 'V'^ft 
his unhappy a\.l?v.OM£v^Tv\..' '^\tfi \<i,^'\\xv<A vo. 



48 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



her chani1)cr till he had quitted the abbey, 
unwilling to subject him or herself to the pain 
of a formal parting. 

As evening and the hour of appointment 
drew nigh Adeline's impatience increased ; 
yet, whon the time arrived, her resolution 
failed, and she faltered from her purpose. 
There was something of indelicacy and dis- 
simulation in an appointed interview, on her 
part, that shocked her. She recollected the 
tenderness of Theodore's manner, and several 
little circumstances which indicated that his 
heart was not unconcerned in the event. 
Again she was inclined to doubt whether he 
had not obtained her consent to this meeting 
upon some groundless suspicion ; and she 
almost determined not to go ; yet it was pos- 
sible that Theodore's assertion might be sin- 
cere, and her danger real ; the chance of this 
made her delicate scruples appear ridiculous ; 
she wondered that she had for a moment 
suffered them to weigh against so serious an 
interest, and blaming herself for the delay 
they had occasioned, hastened to the place of 
appointment. 

The little path which led to this spot was 
silent and solitary, and when she reached the 
recess, Theodore had not arrived. A transient 
pride made her unwilling he should find that 
she was more ]nmctual to his appointment than 
himself, and she turned from the recess into 
a track which wound among the trees to the 
right. Having walked some way, without 
seeing any person or hearing a footstep, she 
returned ; but he was not come, and she 
again left the place. A second time she came 
back, and Theodore was still absent. Recol- 
lecting the time at which she had quitted the 
abbey she grew uneasy, and calculated that 
the hour apixiinted was now exceeded. She 
was vexed and perplexed ; but she seated 
herself on the turf, and was resolved to wait 
the event. After remaining here till the fall 
of twilight in fruitless e.xpectation, her pride 
became more alarmed ; she feared that he 
had discovered something of the partiality he 
had inspired, and believing that he now treated 
her with purposed neglect, she quitted the 
place with disgust and self-accusation. 

When these emotions subsided, and reason 
resumed its influence, she blushed for what 
she termed this childish effervescence of self- 
love. She recollected, as if for the first time, 
these words of Theodore : " I fear you are 
deceived, and that some danger is near you." 
Her judgment now acquitted the offender, and 
she saw only the friend. The import of these 
words, whose truth she no longer doubted, 
again alarmed her. Why did he trouble 
himself to come from the chdteau, on purpose 
to hint her danger, if he did not wish to pre- 
serve her? And if he wished to preserve her, 
what but necessity could have withheld him 
horn the appointment ? 
These reflections decided her at once. She 



resolved to repair on the fbllowingf day at the 
same hour to the recess, whither the interest 
which she believed him to take in her fate 
would no doubt conduct him in the hope ti. 
meeting her. That some evil hovered over 
her she could not disbelieve, but what it mi^^t 
be she was unable to guess. Monsieur and 
Madame La Motte were her friends, and who 
else, removed as she now thought herself 
l^eyond the reach of her father, could injure 
her? But why did Theodore say she was 
deceived ? She found it impossibfe to extri- 
cate herself from the labyrinth of conjecture^ 
but endeavoured to conunand her anxiety till 
the following evening. In the meantime she 
engaged h(M*self in efforts to amuse Madame 
La Motte, who required some relief, after the 
departure of her son. 

Thus oppressed by her own cares, and 
interested by those of Madame La Motte, 
Adeline retired to rest. She soon lost her 
recollection, but it was only to tall into 
harassed slumbers, such as but too often 
haunt the couch of the unhappy. At length 
her perturbed fancy suggested the following 
dream : 

She thought she was in a large old cham- 
l)er belonging to the abbey, more ancient 
and desolate, though in part furnished, than 
any she had yet seen. It was strongly barri- 
caded, yet no person appeared. While she 
stood musing and surveying the apartment 
she heard a low voice call her, and, looking 
towards the place whence it came, she per- 
ceived by the dim hght of a lamp a figrure 
stretched on a bed that lay on the noor. The 
voice called again, and approaching the bed, 
she distinctly saw the features of a man who 
appeared to be dying. A ghastly paleness 
overspread his countenance, yet there was an 
expression of mildness and dignity in it, 
which strongly interested her. 

While she looked on him his featores 
changed, and seemed convulsed in the ago- 
nies of death. The spectacle shocked her, 
and she started back, but he suddaiily 
stretched forth his hand, and seizing hera, 
grasped it with violence. She struggl^ io 
terror to disengage herself, and again looking 
on his face, saw a man who appeared to be 
about thirty, with the same features, bat Id 
full health and of a most benign countenance. 
He smiled tenderly upon her and moved hb 
lips as if to speak, when the floor of the 
chamber suddenly opened and he sank from 
her view. The effort she made to save her* 
self from following awoke her. This dream 
had so strongly impressed her fancy that It 
was some time before she could overcome 
the terror it occasioned, or even be perfectly 
convinced she was in her own apartment. 
At length, however, she composed herself to 
sleep : again she fell into a dream. 

She thought she was bewildered in some 
VAU^ing psLssa^es of the abbey, that It WR9 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



49 



almost dark, and that she wandered about a 
considerable time without being able to tind a 
door. Suddenly she heard a bell toll from above, 
and soon after a confusion of distant voices. 
She redoubled her efforts to extricate herself. 
Presently all was still, and, at length, wearied 
with the search, she sat down on a step that 
crossed the passage. She had not been long 
here when she saw a light glimmer at a dis- 
tance on the walls, but a turn in the passage, 
which was very long, prevented her seeing 
from what it proceeded. It continued to 
glimmer fdntly for some time, and then 
grew stronger, when she saw a man enter 
the passage, habited in a long black cloak, 
like those usually worn by the attendants at 
funerals, and besuing a torch. He called to 
her to follow him, and led her through a long 
passage to the foot of a staircase. Here she 
feared to proceed, and was running back, 
when the man suddenly turned to pursue her, 
and with the terror which this occasioned she 
awoke. 

Shocked by these visions, and more so by 
their seeming connection, which now stnick 
her, she endeavoured to continue awake, lest 
their terrific images should again haunt her 
mind ; after some time, however, her harassed 
spirits again sank into slumber, though not to 
repose. 

She now thought herself in a large old 
gallery, and saw at one end of it a chamber 
door standing a little open, and a light 
within. She went towards it, and perceived 
the man she had before seen, standing at the 
door, and beckoning her towards him. With 
the inconsistency so common in dreams, she 
no longer endeavoured to avoid him, but, 
advancmg, followed him into a suite of very 
ancient apartments, hung with black, and 
lighted up as if for a funeral. Still he led her 
on, till she found herself in the same chamber 
she remembered to have seen in her former 
dream. A coffin, covered with a pall, stood 
at the farther end of the room ; some lights, 
and several persons, surrounded it, who ap- 
peared to be in great distress. 

Suddenly she thought these persons were 
all gone, and that she was left alone, that she 
went up to the coffin, and while she gazed 
upon it she heard a voice speak, as if from 
within, but saw nobody. The man she had 
before seen soon after stood by the coffin, 
and, hfting the pall, she saw beneath it a 
dead person, whom she thought to be the 
dying chevalier she had seen in her former 
dream ; his features were sunk in dcatli, but 
they were yet serene. While she looked at 
him a stream of blood gushed from his side, 
and descending to the floor, the whole cliani- 
ber was overflowed ; at the same time some 
words were uttered in the voice she heard 
before ; but the horror of the scene so entirely 
overcame her that she started and awoke. 

When she had recovered her recollection, 



she raised herself in the l)cd, to Ixj convinoed 
it was a dream she had witnessed, and the 
agitation of her spirits was so great that she 
feared to be alone, and almost determined to 
jcall Annette. The features of the deceased 
person, and the chamlxir where he lay, were 
strongly impressed upon her memory, and 
she still thought she heard the voice and s^iw 
the countenance which her dream repre- 
sented. The longer she considered thcbc 
dreams the more she was surprised— they 
were so very terrible, returned so often, and 
seemed to be so connected with each othirr, 
that she could scarcely think them accidental, 
yet why they should Ix! suiM!rnatural she could 
not tell. She slept no more that nigh*.. 



CIIAPTKR VIII. 

When these prodigies 
Do so conjuiutly meet, let not men s:iy : 
These are tlieir reasons; they are natural l 
Yqx I believe they arc portentous thin>;<!. 

SlIAKSl'UARB. 

When Adeline appeared at breakfast, her 
harassed and languid countenance .struck 
Madame La Motto, who inquired if she was 
ill. Adeline, forcing a smile upon her features, 
said she had not rested well, for that she had 
had very disturbed dreams ; she was about to 
describe them, but a strong and involuntary 
impulse prevented her. At the same time La 
Motte ridiculed her concern so unmercifully, 
that she was almost ashamed to have men- 
tioned it, and tried to overcome the re- 
membrance of its cause. 

After breakfast, she endeavoured to employ 
her thoughts by conversing with Madame La 
Motte ; but they were really engaged by the 
incidents of the last two days ; the cir- 
cumstance of her dreams, and her conjectures 
concerning the information to be com- 
municated to her by Theodore. They had 
thus sat for some time, when a sound of 
voices arose from the great gate of the abbey; 
and on going to the casement, Adeline saw 
the Mar(|uis and his attendants on the lawn 
below. The portal of the abbey concealed 
several people from her view, and among 
these it was possible might be Theodore, who 
had not yet appeared. She continued to 
look for him with great anxiety till the 
Marquis entered the hall with La Motte and 
some other persons, soon after which Madame 
La Motte went to receive him, and Adeline 
retired to her own apartment. 

A message from La Motte, however, soon 
called her to join the party, where she vainly 
hoped to find Theodore. The Marquis arose 
as she approached ; and having paid her 
some general compliments, the conversation 
took a very lively turn. Adeline, finding it 
impossible to counterfeit cheerfulness, while 
her heart was sinking with ariKiftl'j ;>cs\&. ^^- 
appointmcnt, look V\\.\.\t p^x\. 'm '\X. "W^jo^^"^^ 



50 Tim ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

was not once named. She would have asked La Motte pressed his guest to take a bed tt 

concerning hini, had it been possible to inquire the abbey, and he at length consented — a dr- 

with propriety ; but she was obliged to content cumstance which threw Madame La Motto 

herself with hoping, first, that he would into some perplexity as 'to the accommoda- 

arrive Ixjfore dinner ; and then, before the tion to be afforded him. After some time 

departure of the Marquis. she arranged the affair to her satisfaction, re- 

Thus the day passed in expectation and signing her own apartment to the Marquis, 

disappointment. The evening was now and that of I^uis to two of his supoior 

approaching, and she was condemned to attendants ; Adeline, it was further settled, 

remain in the presence of the Marquis, should give up her room to Monsieur and 

apparently listening to a conversation which Madame La Motte, and remove to an inner 

in truth she scarcely heard, while the oi> chamber, where a small bed, usually occupinl 

poitunity was perhaps escaping that would by Annette, Avas placed for her. 

decide her fate. She was suddenly relieved At supper the Marquis ^vas less gay than 

from this state of torture, and thrown into usual ; he frequently addressed Adeline, and 

one, if possible, still more distressing. his look and manner seemed to express the 

The Marquis inquired for Louis, and being tender interest which her indisposition, for 
informed of his departure, mentioned that she still appeared pale and langfiiid, had ex- 
Theodore Peyrou had that morning set out cited. Adeline, as usual, made an dfort to 
for his regiment in a distant province. He forget her anxiety and appear happy, but the 
lamented the loss he should sustain by his veil of assumed cheerfulness was too thin io 
absence ; and expressed some very flattering conceal the features of sorrow, and her feeble 
praise of his talents. The shock of this in- smiles only added a peculiar softness to her 
telligence overpowered thclong-agitated spirits air. The Marquis conversed wiUi her on a 
of Adeline ; the blood forsook her cheeks, variety of. subjects, and displayed an elegant 
and a sudden faintness came over her, from mind, l^he observations of Adeline, which, 
which she recovered only to a consciousness when called upon, she gave wth modest re- 
of having betrayed her emotion, and the luctance, in words at once simple and forcible, 
danger of relapsing into a second fit. seemed to e.xcite his admiration, which he 

She retired to her chamber, where, being sometimes betrayed by an apparently inad- 

once more alone, her oppressed heart found vcrtcnt expression. 

relief from tears, in which she freely indulged. Adeline retired early to her room, which 
Ideas crowded so fast upon her mind that it adjoined on one side to Madame La Motte's, 
was long ere she could arrange them so as to and on the other to the closet formerly men- 
produce anything like reasoning. She endea- tioned. It was spacious and lofty, and what 
voured to account for the abrupt departure of little furniture it contained was falling to 
Theodore. " Is it possible, " said she, "th.it decay; but perhaps the present tone other 
he should take an interest in my welfare, and spirits might contribute more than these dp- 
yet leave me exposed to the full force of a cumstances to give that air of mdancbolr 
danger which he himself foresaw ? Or am I which seemed to reign in it. She was unwil- 
to believe that he has trifled with my simpli- ling to go to bed, lest the dreams that had 
city for an idle frolic, and has now left me to lately pursued her should return, and deter- 
the wondering apprehension he has raised? mined to sit up till she found herself op- 
Impossible ! A countenance so noble and pressed by sleep, when it was probable her 
manners so amiable could never disguise a rest would be profound. She placed the 
heart capable of forming so despicable a de- light on a small table, and, taking a bo^ 
sign. No ! whatever is reserved for me, let continued to read for above an hoiur, till her 
me not relinquish the pleasure of believing mind refused any longer to abstract itself 
that he is worthy of my esteem." from its own cares, and she sat for some time 

She was awakened from thoughts like these leaning pensively on her arm. 
by a peal of distant thunder, and now per- The wind was high, and as it whistled 
ceived that the gloominess of evening was through the desolate apartment and shook 
deepened by the coming storm ; it rolled the feeble doors she often started, and some- 
onward, and soon after the lightning began times even thought she heard sighs m the 
to flash along the chamber. Adeline was pauses of the gust ; but she checked these 
superior to the affectation of fear, and was illusions, which the hour of the night and 
not apt to be terrified ; but she now felt it un- her own melancholy imagination conspired to 
pleasant to be alone, and, hoping that the raise. 

Marquis might have left the abbey, she went As she sat musing, her eyes fixed on the 

down to the sitting-room ; but the threaten- opposite wall, she perceived the arras with 

ing aspect of the heavens had hitherto de- which the room was hung wave backwards 

tamed him, and now the evening tempest and forwards ; she continued to observe it 

made him rejoice that he had not quitted a for some minutes, and then rose to examine 

Th • ^' further. It was moved by the. wind, and 

J.ne storm conimxadi and night came on. sYie b\vi??[v^^ aX VSaa TQQ\aBQ.\3aiy fear it had ex- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



SI 



cited ; but she observed that the tapestry was 
more strongly agitated in one particular place 
than elsewhere, and a noise that seemed 
something more than that of the wind issued 
thence. The old bedstead which La Motte 
had found in this apartment had been re- 
moved to accommodate Adeline, and it was 
behind the place where this had stood that 
the wind seemed to rush with particular 
force. Curiosity prompted her to examine 
still further. She felt about the tapestry, and 
perceiving the wall behind shake under her 
hand, she lifted the arras and discovered a 
small door, whose loosened hinges admitted 
the wind, and occasioned the noise she had 
heard. 

The door was held only by a bolt, having 
undmwn which, and brought the light, she 
descended by a few steps into another 
chamber. She instantly remembered her 
dreams. The chamber was not much like 
that in which she had seen the dying chcva- 
her, and afterwards the bier, but it gave her 
a confus&l remembrance of one throu<,'h 
which she had passed. Holding up the light 
to examine it more fully, she was convinced 
by its structure that it was part of the ancient 
foundation. A shattered casement, placed 
high from the floor, seemed to be the only 
opening to admit light. She observed a door 
on the opposite side of the apartment, and, 
after some moments of hesitation, gained 
courage, and determined to pursue the in- 
quiry. "A mystery seems to hang over 
tiiese chambers," said she, "which it is per- 
haps my lot to develop ; I will at least see 
to what that door leads." 

She stepped forward, and having unclosed 
it, proceeded with faltering steps along a suite 
of apartments, resembling the first in style 
and condition, and terminating in one exactly 
like that where her dream had represented 
the dying person. The remembrance struck 
so forcibly upon her imagination, that she 
was in danger of fainting ; and looking 
roimd the room, almost expected to see the 
ph£Mitom of her dream. 

Unable to quit the place, she sat down on 
some old lumber to recover herself, while her 
spirits were nearly overcome by a superstitious 
dread such as she had never felt before. She 
wondered to what part of the abbey these 
diambers belonged, and that they had so 
long escaped detection. The casements were 
all too high to afford any information from 
without. When she was sufficiently com- 
posed to consider the direction of the rooms, 
and the situation of the abbey, there appeared 
not a doubt that they formed an interior part 
of the original building. 

As these reflections passed over her mind, 
a sudden gleam of moonlight fell upon some 
object without the casement. Being now 
sufficiently composed to wish to pursue the 
inquiry, and believing this object mighi afford 



her somj niians of le.irning th2 situation of 
these roonii, she combated hi*r rom lining 
terrors, and in order to distinguish it more 
clearly. roniDvcd the light to an outer 
chamber ; but before she could return a 
heavy cloud w.ls driving over the face of the 
m Jon, and all without w.is perfectly dirk ; 
she stood for soniv: moments waiting a return- 
ing gleam, but the obscurity continued. As 
she wont softly back for the liglit her foot 
stumbled over something on the floor, and 
while she stooped to examine it the m'>on 
again shone, so llmt she could distinguish 
througli the casemont the eastern towers of 
the abbey. This discovery confirmed her 
former conjectures concerning the inte- 
rior situation of these apartments. The 
obscurity of the place prevented her dis- 
covering what it was that hari impeded 
her steps, Init having brought the light 
forward, she perceived on the floor an old 
dagger : with a trembling hand she took it 
up, and upon a closer view perceived that 
it was spotted and stained with rust. 

Shocked and surprised, she looked round 
the room for some object that might confirm 
or destroy the dreadful suspicion which now 
rushed upon her mind ; but she saw only a 
great chair, wi^h broken arms, that stood in 
one corner of the room, and a table in a con- 
dition equally shattered, except that in 
another part lay a confused heap of things 
which appeared to be old lumber. She went 
up to it, and perceived a broken bcdstearl, 
with some decayed remnants of furniture, 
covered with dust and cobwebs, and which 
seemed, indeed, as if they had not been 
moved for many years. Desirous, however, 
of examining further, she attempted to raise 
what appeared to have been part of the bed- 
stead, but it slipped from her hand, and 
rolling to the floor, brought with K some of 
the remaining lumber. Adeline started asido 
and saved herself, and when the noise it 
made had ceased, she heard a small rustling 
sound, and as she was about to leave the 
chamber, saw something falling gently among 
the lumber. 

It was a small poll of paper, tied with a 
string and covered with dust. Adeline took 
it up, and opening it perceived a hand- 
writing. She attempted to read it, but the 
part of the manuscript she looked at was so 
much obliterated that she found this difficult, 
though what few words were legible im- 
pressed her with curiosity and terror, and 
induced her to return with it immediately to 
her chamber. 

Having reached her own room, slie fastened 
the private door, and let the arras fall over it 
as before. It was now midnight. The still- 
ness of the hour, interrupted only at intervals 
by the hollow sighings of the blast, heightened 
the solemnity of Adelirv^'s fe^Vvcv.^'*.. 'Scv'e. 
wished she was xioX aXc«ift, ^xA \i^lQ>\^ ^^ 



52 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



proceeded to look into the manuscript, 
listened whether Madame La Mottc was yet 
in her chamber : not the least sound was 
heard, and she gently opened the door. The 
profound silence within almost convinced her 
that no person was there ; but willing to be 
farther satisfied, she brought the light and 
found the room empty. The lateness of the 
hour made her wonder that Madame La 
Motte was not in her chaniber, and she pro- 
ceeded to the top of the tower stairs to 
hearken if any person was stirring. 

She heard the sound of voices from below, 
and amongst the rest that of La Motte 
speaking in his usual tone. Being now 
satisfied that all was well, she turned towards 
her room, when she heard the Marquis pro- 
nounce her name Nvith unusual emphasis. 
She paused. •' I adore her," pursued he, 
"and by heaven" — He was interrupted by 
La Motte: "My Lord, remember your 
promise." 

"I do," replied the Marquis, "and I will 
abide by it. But we trifle. To-morrow I 
will declare myself, and I shall then know 
both what to hoj^e and how to act." 

Adeline trembled so exce^jsively that she 
could scarcely support herself ; she wished to 
return to her chamber : yet she was too much 
interested in the words she had heard not to 
be anxious to have them more fully ex- 
plained. There was an interval of silence, 
after which they conversed in a lower tone. 
Adeline remembered the hints of Theodore, 
and determined, if possible, to be relieved 
from the terrible suspense she now suffered. 
She stole softly down a few steps that she 
might catch tlie accents of the speakers ; but 
they were so low, that she could only now and 
then distinsruish a few words. 

" Her father, say you?" said the Marquis. 

"Yes, my lord, hoi* father. I am well 
informed of what I say." 

Adeline shmldeied at the mention of her 
father ; a new terror seized her, aufl with in- 
creasing eagerness she endeavoured to dis- 
tinguish their words, but for some time found 
this to' be inipossibl?. 

" Here is no time to he lost," s.iid the 
Marcjuis ; " to-morrow then." 

She heard \:.\ Mollc rise, and believing it 
was t-) leave the room, she hurried up the 
steps, and having reached her chamber, sank 
almost lifeless in a chair. 

It was her father only of whom slie thought. 
Slie doubted not that he had pursued and 
discovered her retreat, and though this 
conduct appeared very inconsistent with his 
former behaviour in abandoning her to 
strangers, her fairs suggested it would ter- 
minate in some new cruelty. She did not 
hesitate to pronounce this the danger of 
which Theodore hid warned her ; but it was 
Iwpo.s'ii.'yle to surmise how he h.ul gained his 
knowledge of it, or how he had become 



sufficiently acquainted with her story, except 
through La Motte, her apparent fnend and 
protector, whom she was thus, though un- 
willingly, led to suspect of treachery. Why, 
indeed, should La Motte conceal from her 
only his knowledge of her father's intention, 
unless he designed to deliver her into his 
hands ? Yet it was long ere she could bring 
herself to believe this conclusion possible. 
To discover depravity in those whom we have 
loved, is one of the most exquisite tortures to 
a virtuous mind, and the conviction is often 
rejected before it is finally admitted. 

The words of Theodore, which told her lie 
was fearful she was deceived, confirmed this 
painful apprehension of La Motte, with another 
more distressing, that Madame La Motte was 
also united against her. This thought for a 
moment subdued terror and left her only grief ; 
she wept bitterly. " Is this human nature?" 
cried she. "Am I doomed to find everybody 
deceitful ?" An unexpected discovery of vice 
in those whom we have admired, inclines us 
to extend our censure of the individual to the 
species : we henceforth contemn appearances, 
and too hastily conclude that no person is to 
be trusted. 

Adeline determined to throw herself at the 
feet of La Motte on the following morning, 
and implore his pity and protection. Her 
mind was now too much agitated by her own 
interests to permit her to examine the manu- 
script, and she sat musing in her chair, till 
she heard the steps of Madame La ^lotte 
when she retired to bed. La Motte soon 
after came up to his chamber, and Adeline — 
the mild, persecuted Adeline, who had now 
passed two days of torturing anxiety, and 
one night of terrific visions — endeavoured to 
compose her mind to sleep. In the present 
state of her spirits she quickly caught alarm, 
and she had scarcely fallen into a slumber, 
when she was roused by aloud and uncommon 
noise. She listened, and thought the sound 
came from the apartments below, but in a few 
minutes there was a hasty knocking at the 
door of La Motte's chamber. 

La Motte having just fallen asleep was not 
easily to be roused ; but the knocking increased 
with such violence, that Adeline, extremely 
terrified, arose and went to the door that 
o]^ened from her chamber into his, with a 
design to call him. She was stopped by the 
voice of the Marquis, which she now clearly 
distinguished at the outer door. He called 
to La Motte to arise immediately, and 
Madame La Motte endeavoured at the same 
time to rouse her husband, who at length 
awoke in much alarm, and soon after joining 
the Marquis, tliey went downstairs together. 
Adeline now dressed herself, as well as her 
trembling hands would permit, and went into 
the adjoining chamber, where she found 
Mad.\iue La Molte extremely surprised and 
tcmfved. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



S3 



The Marquis in the meantime told I^ 
Motte, with great agitation, that he recollected 
having appomted some persons to meet him 
upon business of importance early in the 
morning, and it was therefore necessary for 
him to set off for his cMteau immediately. 
As he said this, and desired that his servants 
might be called. La Motte could not help 
observing the ashy paleness of his countenance, 
or expressing some apprehension that his 
lordship was ill. The Marquis assured him 
he was perfectly well, but desired that he 
might set out immediately. Peter was now 
ordered to call the other servants ; and the 
Marquis having refused to take any refresh- 
ment, bade La Motte a hasty adieu, and, as 
soon as his people were ready, left the abbey, 

I^ Motte returned to his chamber, musing 
on the abrupt departure of his guest, whose 
emotion appeared much too strong to pro- 
ceed from the cause assigned. He appeased 
the anxiety of Madame La Motte, and at 
the same time excited her surprise by acquaint- 
ing her with the occasion of the late disturb- 
ance. Adeline, who had retired from the cham- 
ber on the approach of La Motte, looked out 
from her window on hearing the tramping of 
horses. It was the Marquis and his i>cople 
who just then passed at a little distance. 
Unable lo distinguish who the persons were, 
she was alarmed by observing such a party 
about the abbey at that hour, and, calling to 
inform La Motte of the circumstance, was 
made acquainted with what had passed. At 
length she retired to bed, and her slumbers 
were this night undisturbed by dreams. 

When she arose in the morning she observed 
La Motte walking alone in the avenue below, 
and she hastened to seize the opportunity 
which now offered of pleading her cause. 
She approached him with faltering steps, 
while the paleness and timidity of her coun- 
tenance discovered the disorder of her mind. 
Her first words, without entering upon any 
explanation, implored his compassion. La 
Motte stopped, and looking earnestly in her 
face, inquired whether any part of his conduct 
towards her merited the suspicion which her 
request implied. Adeline for a moment 
blushed that she had doubted his integrity, 
but the words she had overheard returned to 
her memory. 

" Your behaviour, sir," said she, " I acknow- 
ledge to have been kind and generous, bevond 

what I had a right to expect, but ' and 

she paused. She knew not how to mention 
what she blushed to believe. I-.a Motte con- 
tinued to gaze on her in silent expectation, 
and at length desired her to proceed and ex- 
plain her meaning. She entreated that he 
would protect her from her father. La Motte 
looked surprised and confused. 

"Your father!" said he. 

"Yes, sir," replied Adeline. " I am not 
ignorant that he has discovered my retreat. 



I have everything to dread from a parent who 
has treated me with such cruelty as you were 
witness of ; and I again implore that you will 
save me from his hands." 

La Motte stood fixed in thought, and 
Adeline continued her endeavours to interest 
his pitv. " What reason have you to suppose, 
or rattier, how have you learned that your 
father pursues you ? " 

The question confused Adeline, who blushed 
to acknowledge how she had overheard his 
discourse, and disdained to invent or utter a 
falsity ; at length she confessed the truth. 
The countenance of I^ Motte instantly 
changed to a savage fierceness, and sharply 
rebuking her for conduct, to which she had 
been rather tempted by chance than prompted 
by design, he inquired what she had over- 
heard that could so much alarm her. She 
faithfully repeated the substance of the inco- 
herent sentences that had met her ear. While 
she spoke he regarded her with a fixed attcn- 
tion. 

"And was this all you heard? Is it fi-om 
these few words that you draw such a positive 
conclusion? Examine them, and you will 
find they do not justify it." 

She now perceived what the fervour of her 
fears had not permitted her to observe before, 
that the words, unconnectedly as she heard 
them, imported little, and that her imaginar 
tion had filled up the void in the sentences, so 
as to suggest the evil apprehended. Not- 
withstanding this, her fears were little abated. 

"Your apprehensions are doubtless now 
removed," resumed La Motte ; "but to give 
you a proof of the sincerity which you have 
ventured to question, I will tell you they were 
just. You seem alarmed, and with reason. 
Your father has discovered your residence, 
and has already demanded you. It is true 
that from a motive of compassion I have re- 
fused to resign you, but I have neither au- 
thority to withhold or means to defend you. 
When he comes to enforce his demand, you 
will perceive this. Prepare yourself, there- 
fore, for the evil which you see is inevitable." 

Adeline for some time could speak only 
by her tears. At length, with a fortitude 
which despair had roused, she said : " I re- 
sijjn myself to the will of heaven 1 " I-a 
Motte gazed on her in silence, and a strong 
emotion appeared on his countenance. He 
forbore, however, to renew the discourse, and 
withdrew to the abbey, leaving Adeline in the 
avenue absorbed in grief. 

A summons to breakfast hastened her to 
the parlour, where she passed the morning 
in conversation with Madame La Motta, to 
whom she told all her a])prehensions and 
expressed all her sorrow. Pity and superficial 
consolation were all that Madame La Motte 
could offer, though apparently much affected 
by Adeline's discourse. Thus the houvs 
passed heavWy awoj, ^iViSL'i >Xv^ ^acc^aN.^ ^^^ 



56 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

*' If, for instance, the Marquis should here- lection in the course of the day, but she had 

after avow a serious passion for you, and offer then been either too much interested by the 

you his hand, would no petty resentment, no events of the moment, or too apprehensive of 

lurking^ prepossession for some more happy interruption, to attempt a perusal of it. She 

lover, prompt you to refuse it ?" now took it from the drawer in which it had 

Adeline blushed, and fixed her eyes on the been deposited, and intending only to look 

ground. "You have indeed, sir, named the cursorily over the few first pages, sat down 

only means I should reject of evincing my with it by her bedside. 

sincerity. The Marquis I can never love, She opened it with an eagerness of inquiry 

nor, to speak sincerely, ever esteem. I con- which the discoloured and almost obliterated 

fess the peace of one's' whole life is too much ink but slowly gratified. The first words on 

to sacrifice, even to gratitude." the page were entirely lost, but those that 

La Motte looked displeased. " 'Tis as I appeared to commence the narrative were as 

thought," he said, "these delicate sentiments follow : 
make a fine appearance in speech, and 

render the person who utters them infinitely " Oh ! ye, whoever ye are, whom chance 

amiable ; but bring them to the test of or misfortune may hereafter conduct to this 

action, and they dissolve into air, leaving spot — to ye I speak — ^to ye reveal the story of 

only the wreck of vanity behind." my wrongs, and ask you to avenge them. 

This unjust sarcasm brought tears to her Vain hope ! yet it imparts some comfort to 

eyes. " Since your safety, sir, depends upon believe it possible that what I now write may 

my conduct," said she, "resign me to my one day meet the eye of a fellow-creatuce ; 

father. I am willing to return to him, since that the words which tell my sufferings, may 

my stay here must involve you in new mis- one day draw pity from the feeling heart, 

fortunes. Let me not prove myself unworthy "Yet stay your tears — your pity now is use- 

of the protection I have hitherto experienced, less ; long since have the pangs of misery 

by preferring my own welfare to yours, ceased ; the voice of complaining is passed 

\Vlien I am gone you will have no reason to away. It is weakness to wish for compassion 

apprehend the Marquis's displeasure, which which cannot be excited till I shall sink in the 

you may probably incur if I stay here ; for I rej:)ose of death, and taste, I hope, the happi- 

feel it impossible that I could ever consent to ness of eternity. 

receive his adilresses, however honourable " Know tlien, that on the night of the 

were his views." 12th of October, in the year 1642, I was 

La Motte seemed hurt and alarmed, arrested on the road to Caux, and on the 

"This must not l)e," said he ; "let us not very spot where a column is erected to the 

harass ourselves by stating possible evils, and memory of the immortal Henry, by four 

then, to avoid them, fly to those which are ruftians, who, after disabling my servant, bore 

certain. No, Adeline, though you are ready me through wilds and woods to this abbey. 

to sacrifice yourself to my safety, I will not Their demeanour was not that of common 

suffer you to do so. I will not yield you to banditti, and I soon perceived they were em- 

your fatlier but upon compulsion. Be satis- ployed by a superior power to perpetrate some 

ficd therefore upon this point. The only dreadful purpose. Entreaties and bribes 

return I ask is a civil deportment towards were vainly offered them to discover their 

the Marquis." em])loyer and abandon their design : they 

" I will endeavour to obey you, sir," said would not reveal even the least circumstance 

Adeline. of their intentions. 

Madame La Motte now entered the room, "But when, after a long journey they 

and this conversation ceased. Adeline passed anived at this edifice, their base employer was 

that evening in melancholy thoughts, and at once revealed, and his horrid scheme but 

retired as soon as possible to her chamber, too well understood. What a moment \^-as 

eager to seek in sleep a refuge for sorrow. that ! All the thunders of heaven seemed 

launched at this defenceless head I Oh I 
fortitude ! nerve my heart to- 



Adeline's light was now expiring in the 

prr \pxFR TY socket, and the paleness of the ink, so feebly 

^' shone upon, baflied her effort to discriminate 

Full many a melancholy night t^^ letters ; it was imjiossible to i^rocure a 

He watched the slow return of light, light from below without discovering that 

And souglit the powers of sleep ; slic was yet uj), a circumstance which would 

To spre.iJ a momentary gloom excite suri)rise, and lead to explanations such 

nrhKn?owi^on' J'^"*'^•''^^ . as she did not wish to enter upon. Thus 

OJ bland oblivion s dews his burnmij eyes to steep. „,„„ , n > 1 *^ i .1 • • *^ V. 7 "" 

Warton. compelled to suspend the mquiry, which so 

many attendant circumstances had rendered 

Tim MS. found by Adeline the preceding awfully interesting, she retired to her humble 

Dl£^bt, bad several times occurred to her recol- bed. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



$7 



What she had read of the MS. awakened a 
dreadful interest in tlic fate of the writer, and 
csdled up terrific images to her mind. "In 
these apartments ! " said she, and she shud- 
dered and closed her eyes. At length she 
heard Madame La Motte enter her clianil)cr, 
and the phantoms of fear beginning to dUsi- 
pate, left her to repose. 

In the morning she was awakened by 
Madame La Motte, and found, to her dis- 
appointment, that she had slept so much Ixs 
yond her usual time, as to be unable to renew 
the perusal of the MS. La Motte appeared 
uncommonly gloomy, and Madame wore an 
air of melancholy, which Adeline attributed 
to the concern she felt for her. Breakfast Mv-as 
scarcely over when the sound of horses' feet 
announced the arrival of a stranger ; and 
Adeline, from the oriel recess of the hall, saw 
the Marquis alight. She retreated with ])re- 
cipitation, and forgetting the request of La 
Nlotte, was hastenmg to her chamber ; but 
the Marquis was already in the hall, and 
seeing ho- leaving it, turned to I^ Alotte 
with a look of inquiry. I^ Motte called her 
back, and by a frown too intelligent reminded 
her of her ]»omise. She summoned all her 
spirits to her aid, but advanced, notwithstand- 
ing, in visible emotion, while the Marciuis 
addressed her as usual, the same easy gaiety 
playing upon his countenance and directing 
his manner. 

Adeline was surprised and shocked <it this 
careless confidence, which, however, by 
awakening her pride, communicated to her an 
air of dignity that abashed him. He spoke 
with hesitation, and frequently appeared ab- 
stracted from the subject of discourse. At 
length arising, he l)egged Adeline would 
favour him with a few moments' conversation. 
Monsieur and Madame La Motte were now 
leaving the room, when Adeline, turning to 
the Marquis, told him, "she would not hear 
any conversation except in the presence of 
her friends." But she said this in vain, fur 
ihey were gone ; and La Motte, as he with- 
drew, expressed by his looks, how much an 
attempt to follow would displease him. 

She sat for some time in silence and trem- 
bling expectation. 

"I am sensible," said the Manjuis, at 
length, *'that the comluct to which the 
ardour of my passion lately betrayed me, has 
injured me in your opinion, and that you will 
not easily restore me to your esteem ; but, I 
trust, the offer which I now make you, both 
of my title and fortune, will sufficiently prove 
the sincerity of my attachment, and atone for 
the transgression which love only occasioned." 

After this specimen of conmionplace ver- 
bosity, which the Marquis seemed to consider 
as a prelude to triumph, he attempted to 
impress a kiss upon the hand of Adeline, who, 
witlidrawing it hastily, said : 

"You are already, my lord, acquainted 



with my sentiments upon this subject, and it 
is almost unnecessary for me now to re|xiat, 
that I cannot accept the honour you offer 
me." 

" Explain yourself, lovely Adeline ! I am 
ignorant that till now I ever made you this 
offer," 

" Most true, .sir," said Adrline, "and you 
do well to remind me uf this, since, after 
having heard your former pro]Xj!>ul, I can 
listen for a moment to any other." She rose 
to quit the room. 

" Stay, madam," said the Marcjuis, with a 
look in which offended pride struggled to 
conceal itself ; "do not suffer an extravagant 
resentment to o]>erate against your true in- 
terests ; recollect the dangers tliat surround 
you, and consider the value of an offer, which 
may afford you at least an honourable 
asylum." 

"My misfortunes, my lord, whatever they 
are, I have never obtruded upon you ; you 
will therefore excuse my observing that your 
present mention of them conveys a much 
greater api^earancc of insult than compassion." 

The Marquis, though witlievident confusion, 
was going to reply ; but Adeline would not 
be detained, and retired to her chamber. 
Destitute as she was, her iieart revoltetl from 
the proposal of tlie Marquis, and she de- 
termined never to accept it. To her dishke 
of his general disposition, and tlic aversion 
excited by his late offer, were added indeed 
the influence of a prior attachment, and of a 
remembrance which she found it impossible 
to erase from her heart. 

The Marquis stayed to dine, and in con- 
sideration of La Motte, Adeline appeared at 
table ; where the former gazed upon her with 
such frequent and silent earnestness, that her 
distress became insupportable, and when the 
cloth was drawn, she instantly retired. 
Madame La Motte soon followed, and it was 
not till evening th.at she had an opportunity 
of returning to the MS. When Slonsieur 
and Madame I^ Motte were in their chamber, 
and all was still, she drew forth the narrative, 
and trimming her lamp, sat down to read as 
follows : 

" The ruffians unbound me from my horse, 
and led me through the hall up the spiral 
staircase of the abbey : resistance was useless, 
but I looked around in the hope of seeing 
some person less obdurate than the men Vho 
brought me hither ; some one who might be 
sensible to pity, or capable at least of civil 
treatment. I looked in vain ; no person 
appeared : and this circumstance confirmed 
my worst a])prehensions. The secrecy of the 
beginning foretold a horrible conclusion. 
Having passed some chambers, they stopped 
in one hung with old tajDcstry. I inquired why 
we did not go on, and was told I should soon 
know. 

"At that moraervl 1 t^\)^^\.vi^ \a «rr. ^n^ 



58 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

instmnicnt of <lo;ilh upliftwl, and I silently Addinc pouacd. Here the wreldied writer 

rt-comim-iulctl nivsdf to God. But death was appealed directly to her heart ; he spoke m 

not tlien clositfneil for mc; they raised the the ener^gy of truth, and, bv a strong illusion 

arras, and discovcrctl a door, wliich they then of fancy, it seemed as if his p^sufferii^ 

oixMicd. Stizin«r my arms, they led me were at this moment present. She was for 

thnniKh a suite of dismal chamlxjrs beyond, some Ume unable to proceed, and sat m 

llaviii«j reached the farthest of these, they musing sorrow. ^^ .^ . . .. 

aijain sloppird ; tlie horrid gloom of the place *' In these very apartments, said she, ;'thif 

Rt'enied congenial to nmrder, and inspired poor sufferer was confined : here he-— ' 

clcatlly thoughts, .\gain I looked round for Adeline started, and thought she heard a 

the instrument of destruction, and again I sound, but the stilhiess of night was undis- 

was respited. I supplicated to know wliat turbcd. t. l ■• "j v 

was designed me ; it was now unnecessary to "In these very chambers, said she. "these 

usk who was the author of the design. They lines were written— these lines, from which 

were silent to the (luestion, but at length told he then derived a comfort in believing they 

lue this chaml>er was my prison. Having would hereafter be read by some pitying e>'e. 

said this, and set down a jug of water, they This time is now come. Your miseries, oh 

left the room, and I heard the door barred injured being 1 are lamented, where th^ were 

upon me. endured. Here, where you sufiered, I weep 

" Oh sound of despair ! Oh moment of un- for your suffering 1 " 

utterable anguish I The pang of death itself Her imagination was now stroi^Iy im- 

is surelv not superior to that I then su.Tered. pressed, and, to her distempered senses the 

Shut oiit from day, from friends, from life— suggestions of a bewildered mind appeared 

for such I must foretell it— in the prime of my with the force of realitv. Again she started 

years, in the height of my transgressions, and and listened, and thought she heard "Here," 

left to imagine horrors more terrible than anv, distinctly repeated by a whisper immediately 

pcriiaps, which certainty could give— I siiik behind her. The terror of the thought, how- 

beneath the " ever, was but momentary, she knew it could 

Hero several pages of the manuscript were not be ; convinced that her fancy had deceived 

dwayed with damp, and totally illegible, her, she took up the MS. and again b^gan to 

With nuich difliculty Adeline made out the read : 

following lines : " For what am I reserved ; whv this delay? 

"Three days have now passed in solitude If I am to die, why not quicklv? Tliree 

and silence ; the horrors of death are ever weeks have I now passed wiUiin these walls, 

before my eyes ; let me endeavour to prepare during which lime no lookof^Hty has softened 

for the dreadful change ! When I awake in my afilictions, no voice save my own has met 

the morning I think I shall not live to sec my ear. The countenances of the ruffians 

another night ; and when night returns, that who attend me arc stem and inflexible, and 

I must never unclose my eyes on the morning, their silence is obstinate. This stillness is 

Why am I brought hither — why confined thus dreadful ! Oh, ye who have known what it is 

rigorously -but for death ? Yet what action to live in the depths of solitude, who have 

ol my life has deservijd this at the hand of a passed your dreary days without one sound 

fellow-creature ! Of to cheer you, ye, and ye only, can tell what I 

feel now, and ye may know how much I 

***** would endure to' hear the accents of a human 

voice ! 

"Oh my children I Oh friends far distant I "Oil dire extremity I Oh state of living 

I shall never see you more -never more death ! What dreadful stillness 1 All around 

prceive the parlmg look of kindness -never me is dead, and do I really exist, or am I but a 

bestow a partmg blessing ! Ye know not my statue? Is this a vision? Are these things 

wretched state— alas I you cannot know it by real ? Alas, I am bewildered !— this death- 

luuuan means. Ye believe me happy, or ye like and ixiri)etual silence— this dismal cham* 

would fly to my relief. I know that what I ber the dread of further suflerings hate 

now write cannot avail me, yet there is com- disturbed my fancy. Oh for some friendly 

fort m pouring forth my griefs, and I bless brciist to lay my weary head on, some cordial 

that man, less savage than his fellows, who accents to revive my soul I 
has supplied me these means of recording 

them. Alas ! he knows full well, that from * * ♦ « • 
this indulgence he has nothing to fear. My 

I-evoi^'^«, J'*'^i^^ "° friends to succour me, nor I write by stealth. He who fumUhed me 

'vho ,mJ t.S ""'^ '' ;' S°° ^T' ^^^ 'y^ ''"^^ ''^*-^ "^^^^^^^ ^ ^"^^^ '^^s suffered for some 

Rive a^eir to mv '"-''i'^ '''^'^^ \ "v°''' ''"'''• ^>''"P^^'?s of pity he may have discovered for 

often for the S^^^^^ ^^r^" ''^'^'^ "'"^'i ^ 'r^\ "?t ^^'^''^ l»>n for several days. 

Xurcsy' tiistrcbbcb of my fellow-crea- periiaps ho is inclined to help me, and for 

that reason is forbid to come. Oh, that hopel 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



S9 



but how vain 1 Never more must I quit these 
wsdls while life reiuains. Another day is 
gone and yet I live ; at this time to-morrow 
night my sufTerings may be scaled in death. 
I will continue my journal nightly till the 
hand that writes shall be stopped by death — 
when the journal ceases the reader will know 
I am no more. Perhaps these are the last 
lines I shall ever write." 



AdeUne paused, while her tears fell fast. 

" Unhappy man ! " she exclaimed, "and 
was there no pitying soul to save thee? 
Great God ! thy ways are wondeiful ! " 

While she sat musing, her fancy, which 
now wandered in the regions of terror, gradu- 
aUy subdued reason. There was a glass 
bdbre her upon the table, and she feared to 
raise her looks towards it, lest some other 
face than her own should meet her eyes. 
Other dreadful ideas and strange images of 
fantastic thought now crossed her mind. 

A hollow si^ seemed to pass near her. 

*' Holy Viigin, protect me ! " cried she, and 
threw a fearful gleuice round the room ; "this 
is surely something more than fancy." 

Her fears so far overcame her that she was 
several times upon the point of calling up 
part of the family, but unwillingness to dis- 
turb them and a dread of ridicule withheld 
her. She was also afraid to move and almost 
to breathe. As she listened to the wind that 
murmured at the casements of her lonely 
chamber, she again thought she heard a sigh. 
Her imagination refused any longer the con- 
trol of reason, and, turning her eyes, a fi^jure, 
whose exact form she could not dibtin^Miish, 
appeared to pass along an obscure jiart of the 
caamber ; a dreadful chillncss came over her, 
and she sat fixed in her chair. At length a 
deep sigh somewhat relieved her oppressed 
spirits, and her senses seemed to return. 

AU remaining quiet, after some time she 
began to question whether her fancy had not 
decfuved her, and she so far conquered her 
terror as to desist from calling Madame La 
Motte ; her mind was, however, so much 
disturbed, that she did not venture to trust 
herself that night again with the MS., but, 
having spent some time in prayer, and in 
endeavouring to compose her spirits, she re- 
tired to bed. 

When she awoke in the morning the sun- 
beams played upon the casements, and dis- 
pelled the illusions of darkness ; her mind, 
soothed and invigorated by sleep, rejected 
the mystic and turbulent promptings of ima- 
gination. She arose refreshed and thankful, 
but, upon going down to breakfast, this tran- 
sient gleam of peace fled upon the apj^earance 
of the Marquis, whose frequent visits at the 
abbey, after what had passed, not only dis- 
pleased but alarmed her. She saw that he 



was determined to persevere in addressing 
her, and the boldness and insensibility of this 
conduct, while it excited her indignation, in- 
creased her disgust. In i)ity to \a Motte she 
endeavoured to conceal these emotions, tliough 
she now thought that lie rwiuired too much 
from her complaisance, and lx:gnn seriously 
to consider how she might avoid the necessity 
of continuing it. The Marquis Ixihaved to 
her with the most respectful attention, but 
Adeline was silent and reserved, and seized 
the first opportunity to withdraw. 

i\& she passed up the spiral staircase Peter 
entered the hall below, and seeing Adeline, he 
stopped and looked earnestly at her ; she did 
not observe him, but he called her softly, and 
she then saw him make a signal as if he had 
something to conmmnicate. In the next in- 
stant La Motte oi>ened the door of the vaulted 
room, and Peter hastily disappeared. She 
proceeded to her chamber, nnninating on this 
signal, and the cautious nwnner in which 
Peter had given it. 

But her thoughts soon returned to their 
wonted subjects. Three days were now 
passed, and she heard no intelligence of her 
father; she began to hoix; that he had re- 
lented from the violent measures hinted at by 
La Motte, and that he njcant to pursue a 
milder plan ; but when she considered his 
character, this appeared improbable, and she 
relapsed into»hcr former fears. Her residence 
at the abbey was now become painful from 
the perseverance of the Marquis and the con- 
duct which La Motte obliged her to adopt ; 
yet she could not think, without dread, of 
quitting it to return to her father. 

The image of Theodore often intruded upon 
her busy thoughts, and brought with it a pang, 
which his stmnge dej^arlure occa.ifjiied. She 
had a confused notion that his fate was some- 
how connected with her own, and lier strug- 
gles to prevent the remembrance of him served 
only to show how much her heart was his. 

To divert her thoughts from these subjects, 
and gratify the curiosity so strongly excited 
on tiie preceding night, she now took up the 
MS., but was hindered from opening it by the 
entrance of Madame La Motte, who cauic to 
tell her the Marquis was gone. Tliey passed 
their morning together in work and general 
conversation. La Motte not appearing till 
dinner, when he said little, and Adeline less. 
She asked him, however, if he had heard from 
her father. 

" I have not heard from him," said La 
Motte ; "but there is ^ood reason, as I am 
informed by the Marquis, to believe he is not 
far off." 

Adeline was shocked, yet she was able to 
reply, with becoming firnmess : 

" I have already, sir, involved you too 
much in my distress, and now see that re- 
sistance will destroy you without serving vfta. \ 
I am, iherctoie, conVtiiXQ^ \.q \^\.\ffu Vi \o?i 



6o 



THE ROMAXCE OF THE FOREST. 



£aihcr, and thts sjxire you farther c?.la- 
mliy." 

•This is a rash detcrm!n.i:ion." n-piied 
La Motte. " and if you pur»ue ii I f'.oj you 
\v:ll S'-'Vi-rcIv re'"<.'ni. I spe.ik to vou as a 
fric:: *. A-lc'.ine. aii«l desirt.* yc»u will endeavour 
to \W,:\\ I .• :ne \\it;iu-l prvjudicc. The Mar- 
CjUi', I :"r..l. h.is offered you his hand. I 
know T.K}\ '.\h:ch c:rv.umi:An« most excites 
my surprise — that a man of his rank and con- 
se*.juer.ce should solicit a marriage with a 
prrsor. without fortune or ostensible connec- 
tion-, or that a person so circumstanced 
should even for a moment reject the advan- 
tagt:5 thus offered her. You weep. Adeline ; 
lei me hope that you are con-.inced of the ai>- 
surdiiy of this conduct, and will no longer 
tririe with your good fortune. 'ITie kindness 
I have al:owri you must convince vou of my 
regard, and that I have no motive for offering 
you this advice but your advantage. It is 
necessar>'. however, to say that, should your 
faiht-r KjI i:-.:.:-t i:TX)n vour removal, I know 
not r.ow lo!i^ my circumstaiices may enable 
me to affoi-.i even the humble pittance }uu 
receive here. Siill you are silent." 

The anguish which tins speech e.xciied sujv 
pressed her utterance, and she continued to 
weop. At length she said : 

" Suffer nie, sir, to go back to my father ; 
I should, indeed, make an ill return for the 
kindness you mention could I -wish to stay 
after what you now tell me, and to accopt the 
Marquis I feel to be impossible." The re- 
membrance of Theodore arose to her mind, 
and she wept aloud. 

La Motte sat for some time musing. 
"Strange infatuation!" said he. "Is it 
possible that you can persist in this heroism 
of romance, and prefer a father so inhuman 
as yours to the Marquis de Montalt ? a des- 
tiny so full of danger to a life of splendour 
and delight?" 

" Pardon me." said Adeline, "a marriage 
with the Marquis would Ije splendid, but 
nev^r ha]^py. His character excites mv aver- 
sion, and I entreat, sir, that he mnv now no 
more be mentioned. " 



ii 



CHAPl'JCR X. 

Nor are those empty-hearted, whose low sound 
Reverbs no hollownes.. Suakspeakk. 

The conversation related in the last chantor 
was mternipted by the entrance of P^ner 
xvho as he left the room, looked significantly 
at Adeline, and almost beckoned. Sl,c w as 
anxious to know what he meant, an soo,' 

fo t'erin^' T '^" ^''^"' ''^'''^ ^^'^ found h^n 
loitering fhe moment he .saw her he made 

?eS '^^'^''' ''^"^ ^^^^^°"^^ ^^-r il.to the 
3.'/'/'Sif'''' ''''' ^' it you would say?" 



Hush, ma'amselle ; for heaven's sake 
speak lower : if we should be overheard, we 
are all blown up." 

Adeline begged him to explain what he 
meant. 

"Yes, ma'amselle, this is what I have 
M-anted all day long. I have watched and 
watched for an oi^x>rtunity, and looked and 
looked, till I was afraid my master himseU 
would see me ; but all woiUd not do ; you 
would not understand." 

Adeline entreated he would be qnidc 

" Yes. ma'am, but I am so afraid we ahaU 
be seen ; but I would do much to serve sudi 
a good young lady, for I could not^ bear to 
think of 'what threatened you without telling 
vou of it." 

"For God's sake," said Addine; "speak 
quickly, or we shall be interrupted." 

"Well, then ; but you must fixst promise 
by the Holy Virgin never to say it was I that 
told vou. My master would — ' 

" i do. I do I" said Adeline. 

"Well, then — on Monday evening as I— 
hark ! did not I hear a step ? Do, ma amsdHe, 
just step this way to the cloisters. I would 
not for the world we should be seen. I'll go 
out at the hall door, and you can go through 
the ]>assage. I \i*ould not for the worlj we 
should be seen." 

Adeline was much alanned by Peter's 
words, and hurried to the cloisters. He 
quickly appeared, and looking cautiously 
around resumed his discourse. 

"As I was sa>ing, ma'amselle, Monday 
night, when the ^Iarqul5 slept here, you know 
he sat up ver}' late, and I can ^uess, perhap*, 
the reason of that. Strange things came out, 
but it is not my business to tdl all I think." 

" Pray do speak to the purpose," said 
Adeline impatiently; "what is this danger 
which you say threatens me? Be quidc, or 
we shall be-observed." 

"Danger enough, ma'amselle," replied 
Peter, " if you knew all ; and when you do, 
what will it signify, for you can't help your- 
self. But that's neither here nor there ; I 
was resolved to tell you, though I may 
reixjnt it." 

"Or rather you are resolved not to tell 
me," said Adeline, "for you have made no 
progress towards an explanation yetl Bat 
w hat do you mean ? You were speaking of 
the Marquis." 

" Hush, ma'am, not so loud. The Mar- 
quis, as I said, sat up very late, and my 
master sat up with him. One of his men 
went to bed in the oak room, and the other 
stayed to undress his lord. So as we were 
sitting together— I^rd have mercy I it made 
my Imir stand on end ! I tremble yet So as 
we were sitting together— but as sure as Hive 
yonder is my master : I caught a glimpse of 
liim between the trees ; if he sees me it is d) 
ov tt N\\\.\v \\%. \'>\ \^ ^oa another time. " 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 6! 

So saying hd hurried into the abbey, leaving those afflictions. Al;is ! even this small corn- 
Adeline in a state of alarm, curiosity, and fort is denied uii», the windows ojv^n tow.irds 
vexation. She walked out into the forest, inner parts of this ablxsy, and admit <inly a 
ruminating upon Peter's words, and endea- portion ofth.it day which I mubt never more 
vouring to guess to what they alluded ; there fully behold ! I^asl night ! laiit night ! Oh 
Madame La Motte joined her, and they con- sceue of horror 1 " 
veiled on various topics till they reached the 
abbey. « » » # # 

Acieline watched in vain through that day 
for an opportunity of speaking with Peter. Adeline shuddered. She fcan.'<I t«> r- -.id 
Wliile he waited at supper she occasionally the coming sentence, yet curiosity prompletl 
observed his countenance with great anxiety, her to proceed. Still she p;iused ; an unac- 
hoping that it might afford her some degree countable dread came over her. 
of intelligence on the subject of her fears. " Some horrid deed has Ijeen done here," 
When she retired Madame La Motte accom- said she, "the rejKjrts of the pc^asants arc 
panicd her to her chamber, and continued to tmc. Murder has lieen committed." 
converse with her for a considerable time, so The i<lea thrilled her with horror. She re- 
that she had no means of obtaining an inter- collected the dagger which hatl impedwj her 
view with Peter. steps in the secret chamlx:r, and this circmn- 

Madanus La Motte appeared to labour under stance served to confirm lier most t«;rrible 
some great affliction ; and when Adeline, conjectures. She wished to examine it, but 
noticing this, entreated to know the cause of it kiy in one of these chambers, and she 
her dejection, tears started into her eyes, and feared to go in quest of it. 
she abruptly left the room. "Wretched, wretched victim!" she cx- 

This behaviour of Madame I ^-i Motte con- claimed, " coul<l no friend rescue thee from 
curred, with Peter's discourse, to alarm destruction ! Oh that I hnd b<'en near ! yet 
Adeline, who sat pensively uix)n her bed, what could I have done to save thee ? Alas 1 
given up to reflection, till she was roused by nothing. I forget that even now, perhaps, I 
the sound of a clock which stood in the room am, like tliee, abandoned to dangers, from 
below, and which now struck twelve. She which I have no frion<l to succour me. Too 
was preparing for rest, when she recollected surely I guess the author of my miseries ! " 
the MS. and was unable to conclude the She stopped, for she thought she heard a 
night without reading it. The first words sigh, such as on the jircceding night had 
die could distinguish were the following : passed along the chamber. Her blood was 

"Again I return to this poor consolation— chilled, and she sat motionless. The lonely 
again I have been permitted to sec another situation of her room — remote from the rest 
day. It is now midnight 1 My solitary lamp of the family (she was now in her own apart- 
bums b^ide me ; the time is awful, but to ment, from which Madame 1-a Motte had 
me the silence of noon is iis the silence of mid- removed), who were almost beyond call, 
night : a dee|5er gloom is all in which they struck so forcibly upon her imagination, that 
differ. The still, unvarying hours arc num- she with difficulty preserved licrself from 
bercd only by my sufferings I Great God ! fainting. She s;it for a considerable time, 
when shall I be released ! but all N\as still. When she was somewhat 

^ ^ ^ ^ ^, recovered her first design was to alarm the 

family, but further reflection withheld her. 
"But wlience this btran^c oontin^'UKMit ! I She endeavoured to compose her spirits, 
havti never injured him. If deith is designed and aildressed a short prayer to that lieing 
me, why this delay ; and for what but death who had hitherto protected her in every 
am I brought hither ? This abbey — aUis ! " danger. While she was thus em])loyed her 
Here the MS. was again illegible, and for mind gradually became elevated and re- 
several pages Adeline could only make out assured, a sublime comi)lacency fillc<l her 
disjointed sentences. heart, and she sat down once more to pursue 

"Oh bitter draught! when, when shall I the narrative. 
have rest? Oh my. friends ! will none of ye fly Several lines that immediately followed were 
to aid me ; will none of ye avenge my sulfer- obliterated. 
ings ? Ah ! when it is too late —when I am 

gone for ever, ye will endeavour to avenge ***** 

lem. 

^ ^j ^ ^ ^j " He had told me I should not be ])ermi lied 

to live long, not more than three days, and 
*' Once more is ni/^ht n.lurned to me. bade me choose whether I would die by 
Another day has pas.S'.id in solitude and poison or the sword. Oh the agonies of that 
misery. I have climbed to the casement, moment ! (ireat God, thou seest my suffer- 
thinkmg the vicvv of nature would refresh my ings ! I often viewed with a mov\\^\\\A\^ VkC>V^ 
soul, and somewhat enable nic lo su])])ort of escaping l\\c \\\gV^^\.»ivl \q\\viQws» qS-vccj 



62 



THE ROMANCE OP THE FOREST. 



prison. All things witliin the compass of 
possibility I was resolved to try, and with an 
eager desperation I climbed towards the case- 
ments, but my foot slipped, and, falling back 
to the floor, I was stunned by the blow. On 
recovering, the first sounds I heard were the 
steps of a person entering my prison. A recol- 
lection of the past returned, and deplorable 
was my condition. I shuddered at what was 
to come. The same man approached. He 
looked at me first with pity, but his coun- 
tenance soon recovered its natural ferocity. 
Yet he did not then come to execute the 
purpose of his employer. I am reserved to 
another day. Great God, thy will be done 1 " 

Adeline could not go on. All the circum- 
stances that seemed to corroborate the fate of 
this unhappy man crowded upon her mind — 
the reports concerning the abbey, the dreams 
which had forerun her discovery of the private 
apartments, the singular manner in which she 
had found the MS., and the apparition, which 
she now believed she had really seen. Slie 
blamed herself for having not yet mentioned 
the discovery of the manuscript and chambers 
to La Motte, and resolved to delay the dis- 
closure no longer than the following morning. 
The immediate cares that had occupied her 
mind, and a fear of losing the manuscript 
before she had read it, had hitherto kept her 
silent. 

Such a combination of circumstances she 
believed could only be produced by some 
supernatural power, operating for the retri- 
bution of the guilty. This reflection filled 
her mind with «i degree of awe, which the 
loneliness of the large old chamber in which 
she sat, and the hour of the night, soon 
heightened into terror. She had never been 
superstitious, but circumstances so uncommon 
had hitherto conspired in this afltiir, that she 
could not believe them accidental. Her 
imagination, wrought upon by these reflec- 
tions, again became sensible to every impres- 
sion : she feared to look round, lest she should 
again see some dreadful phantom, and she 
almost fancied she heard voices swell in the 
storm which now shook the fabric. 

Still, she tried to command her feelings so 
as to avoid disturbing the family ; but they 
became so painful, that even the dread of La 
Motte's ridicule had hardly power to prevent 
her quitting the chamber. Her mind was 
now in such a state that she found it impos- 
sible to pursue the story in the MS. through ; 
to avoid the tortures of suspense she had 
attempted it. She laid it down again, and 
tried to soothe herself to composure. 

" Wlmt have I to fear?" said she ; "I am 
fi. *u^^ mnocent, and I shall not be punished 
lor the crime of another." 

tlirouli?\l"^ ^^} °^ '^^"^' ^^at now rushed 

the dfor \h';rV°]%'"^''^ ^^ apartments, shook 

totbenriJ^f^ ^^^ from her late bedchamber 

'^^Pn^'ate rooms so forcibly, that AdeMe, 



unable to remain longer in doubt, ran to see 
from whence the noise issued. The arras 
which concealed the door, was violently agi- 
tated, and she stood for a moment obs^irixig 
it in indescribable terror, till, believing it was 
s\^'ayed by the wind, she made a suddoi effort 
to overcome her feelings, and stooped to raise 
it. At that instant she thought sne heard a 
voice. She stopped and listened, but every- 
thing was still ; yet apprehension so far over- 
came her, that she had no power either to 
examine or to leave the chamber. 

In a few moments the voice returned : she 
was now convinced she had not been deceived, 
for, though low, she heard it distinctly, and 
was almost sure it repeated her own name. 
So much was her fancy affected, that she even 
thought it was the same voice she ha4 heard 
in her dreams. This conviction entin^y sub- 
dued the small remains of her courage, and, 
sinking into a chair, she lost all recollection. 

How long she remained in this state she 
knew not. but when she recovered, she ex- 
erted all her strength and reached the wind- 
ing staircase, where she called aloud. No 
one heard her, and she hastened, as fast as 
her feebleness would permit, to the chamber 
of Madame La Motte. She tapped gently at 
the door, and was answered by Madame 
who was alarmed at being a^vakened at so 
unusual an hour, and believed that some 
danger threatened her husband. When she 
understood that it was Adeline, and that 
she was unwell, she quickly came to her 
relief. The terror that was yet visible in 
Adeline's countenance excited ho: inquiriest 
and the occasion of it was expl^ned to her. 

Madame was so much discomposed by the 
relation that she called La Motte from his bedi 
who, more angry at being disturbed than 
interested for the agitation he witnessed, re- 
proved Adeline for suffiering her fancies to 
overcome her reason. She now mentioned 
the discovery she had made of the inner 
chambers and the manuscript, circumstances 
which roused the attention of La Motte so 
much, that he desired to see the MS. and 
resolved to go immediately to the apartments 
described by Adeline. 

Madame La Motte endeavoured to dissuade 
him from his purpose ; but La Motte, with 
whom opposition had alwa3rs an effect con- 
trary to the one designed, and who wished to 
throw further ridicule upon the terrors of 
Adeline, persisted in his intention. He called 
to Peter to attend \vith a light, and insisted 
that Madame La Motte and Adeline shotdd 
accompany him ; Madame desired to be ex- 
cused, and Adeline at first declared she would 
not go ; but he would be obeyed. 

They ascended the tower, and entered the 
first chamber together, for each of the party 
was reluctant to be the last ; in the second 
chamber all was quiet and in order. Adeline 
pT^^^x^x.^Wv^'^^. 9x^<^ -<^uLted to the 



THM, ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. . 63 

which concealed the door. La Motte lifted avenue, where she had not long remained 

the arras and opened the door, but Madame When he api^cared. 

La Motte and Adeline entreated to go no "God bless you, ma'amselle ! " said he, 

fartlier. A|^in he called to them to follow. " I am sorry I frightened you so last night." 

All was quiet in the first chamber; he ex- " Frightened me !" said AdcHne, "how were 

pressed his surprise that the rooms should you concerned in that ? " 

so long have remained undiscovered, and He then informed her, that when he thought 

was proceeding to the second, but suddenly Monsieur and Madame I^a Alotte were aslet^p 

stopped. he had stolen to her chamlxjr-door, with an 

"We will defer our examination till to- intention of giving her the swiuel of what he 
morrow," said he, "the damps of these had begun in the morning ; that he had called 
apartments are unwholesome at any time ; several times as loud as he dared, but re- 
but they strike one more sensibly at night. I ceiving no answer, he believed she was asleen, 
am chilled. Peter, remember to throw open or did not choose to speak with him, and nc 
the windows early in the morning that the air had therefore left the door. This account 
may circulate." of the voice she had heard relieved Adeline's 

"Lord bless your honour," said Peter, spirits; she was even surprised that she did 

" don't you see I can't reach them ? Besides, not know it, till remembering the i><'rlurh)ation 

I don't believe they are made to open ; see of her mind for some time preceding, this sur 

what strong iron bars there are ; the room prise disappeared. 

looks for sul the world like a prison. I sup- She entreated Peter to be brief in explaining 

pose this is the place the people meant when the danger with which she was threatened, 

they said nobody that had been in ever came "If you'll let me go on my own way, 

out." ma'am, you'll soon know it ; but if you hurry 

La Motte, who during this speech had me, and ask me questions here and there, 

been looking attentively at the high windows, out of their places, I don't know what I am 

which, if he had seen them at first, he had saying." 

certainly not observed, now interrupted the " Be it so," said Adeline, " only remember 

eloquence of Peter, and bade him carry the that we may be observed." 

light before them. They all willingly quitted "Yes, ma'amselle, I am as much afraid of 

these chambers, and returned to the room that as you are, for I believe I should be 

below, where a fire was lighted, and the party almost as ill off ; however, that is neither 

remained together for some time. here nor there ; but I'm sure if yon stay in 

La Motte, for reasons best known to him- this old abbey another night it will be worse 

self, attempted to ridicule the discovery and for you ; for, as I said before, I know all 

fears of Adeline, till she, with a seriousness about it." 

that checked him, entreated he would desist. " What mean you, Peter?" 

He was silent, and soon after Adeline, en- "Why, about this scheme that's going 

couraged by the return of daylight, ventured on." 

to her chamber, and for some hours experienced ' ' What, then, is my father ? " 

the blessings of undisturbed repose. "Your father 1 " interrupted Peter. " Lord 

On the following day, Adeline's first care bless you, that is all fudge to frighten you ; 

was to obtain an interview with Peter, whom your father nor nobody else has ever sent 

she had some hopes of seeing as she went after you ; I daresay he knows no more of 

downstairs; he, nowever, did not appear, you than the Pope does — not he." 

and she proceeded to the sitting-room, where Adeline looked displeased. "You trifle," 

she found La Motte apparently much dis- said she ;" if you have anything to tell, say it 

turbed. Adeline asked him if he had looked quickly ; I am in haste." 

at the MS. ' ' Bless you, young lady, I meant no harm ; 

"I have run my eye over it," said he, "but I hope you're not angry; but I'm sure you 

it is so much obscured by time that it can can't deny that your father is cruel. But, as 

scarcely be deciphered. It exhibits a strange I was saying, the Marquis de Montalt likes 

romantic story ; and I do not wonder that you, and he and my master (Peter looked 

after you had suffered its terrors to impress round) have been laying their heads together 

your imagination, you fancied you saw spectres about you." 

and heard wondrous noises. Adeline turned pale ; she comprehended a 

Adeline thought La Motte did not choose part of the truth, and eagerly entreated him 

to be convinced, and she therefore forbore to proceed. 

replv. During breakfast, she often looked ' ' They have been laying their heads to- 

at Peter, who waited, with anxious inquiry ; gether about you. This is what Jacques, the 

and, from his countenance, was still more Marquis's man, tells me. Says he, ' Peter, you 

assured that he had something of importance little know what is going on — I could tell all 

to communicate. In the hope of some con- if I chose it, but it is not for those who are 

versation with him, she left the room as soon trusted to tell again. I warcwftX. xvqnn ^Ci>ax 

as possible, and repaired to her favourite master is close ei\OMg\\ "m\\i ^om.' XS^'a 



64 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



which I was piqued, and resolved to make 
him believe I could be trusted as well as he. 
• Perhaps not,' says I ; 'perhaps I know as 
much as you, though I do not choose to brag 
on't ;' and I winked. ' Do you so?' says he ; 
' then you arc closer than I thought for. She 
is a fine girl,' says he, meaning you, ma'am- 
selle : ' but she is nothing but a poor found- 
ling, after all, so it does nut much signify.' I 
had a mind to know further what he meant, 
so I did not knock him down. By seeming to 
know as much as he. I at last made him dis- 
cover all, and he told me — but you look pale, 
ma'amselle ; are you ill?" 

" No," said Adeline, in a tremulous accent, 
and scarcely able to support herself; " pray 
proceed." 

"And he told me that the Marquis had 
been courting you a good while, but you 
would not listen to him, and had even pre- 
tended he would marry you, jmd all would 
not do. 'As for marriage,' says I, 'I sup- 
pose she knows the Marcliioness is alive ; 
and I'm sure she is not one for his turn upon 
other terms.' " 

"The Marchioness is really living, then?" 
said Adeline. 

" Oh yes, ma'amselle ! we all know that, 
and I thought you had known it too. ' We 
shall see that,' replies Jacques; 'at least, I 
believe that our masters will outwit her.' I 
stared ; I could not help it. 'Aye,' says he, 
'you know your master has agreed to give 
her up to my lord.' " 

"Good God I what will become of me?" 
exclaimed Adeline. 

" Aye, ma'amselle, I am sorry for you ; but 
hear me out. When Jacques said this I quite 
forgot myself. ' I'll never believe it,' said I ; 
' I'll never believe my master would be guilty of 
such a base action ; he'll not give her up, or I'm 
no Christian.' ' Oh I' said Jacques ; ' for that 
matter, I thought you'd known all, else I 
should not have said a word about it. How- 
ever, you may soon satisfy yourself by going 
to the parlour-door, as I have done ; they're 
in consultation about it now, I daresay.' " 

" You need not repeat any more of this 
conversation," said Adeline; "but tell me 
the result of what you heard from the par- 
lour." 

" Why, ma'amselle, when he said this, I 
took him at his word and went to the door, 
where, sure enough, I heard my master and 
the Marquis talking about you. They said a 
great deal which I could make nothing of, 
but at last I heard the Marquis say : ' You 
know the terms— on these terms only will 
I consent to bury the past in ob — ob — obli- 
vion ' — that was the word. Monsieur La 
Motte then told the Marquis, if he would 
return to the abbey upon such a night — 
meaning this very night, ma'amselle— every- 
thing should he prepared according to his 
wishes; 'Adeline shall then be yours, my 



lord,' said he— 'you are already acquainted 
with her chamber.' " 

At these words Adeline clasped her hands 
and raised her eyes to heaven in silent 
despair. 

Peter went on: "When I heard this I 
could not doubt what Jacques had said. 
'Well,' said he, 'what do you tlu'nk of it 
now?' 'Why, that my master's a rascal,' 
says I. ' It's well you don't think mine one 
too,' says he. 'Why, as for that matter,' 
says I ' " 

Adeline, interrupting him, inquired if be 
had heard an>'thing further. 

"just then," said Peter, "we heard 
Madame I^ Motte come out from another 
room, and so we made haste bade to the 
kitchen." 

" She was not present at this conversation, 
then ? " said Adeline. 

" No, ma'amselle, but my; master has tcHA 
her of it, I warrant." 

Adehne was almost as much shocked by 
this apparent perfidy of Madame La Motte 
as by a knowledge of the destruction that 
threatened her. After musing a few moments 
in extreme agitation, "Peter, 'said she, "you 
have a good heart, and feel a just indignation 
at your master's treachery — ^will you assist me 
to escape?" 

"Ah, ma'amselle I" said he, "how can I 
assist you ? Besides, where can we go ? I have 
no friends about here, no more than your- 
self." 

"Oh I" replied AdeUne, in extreme emo- 
tion, "we fiy from enemies 1 strangers may 
prove friends. Assist me but to escape from 
this forest, and you will claim my eternal 
gratitude ; I have no fears bevond it." 

" Why, as for this forest,' replied Peter, 
"I am weary of it myself ; though, when we 
first came, I thought it would l^ fine living 
here— at least, I thought it was very dififeient 
from any hfe I had ever lived before. But 
these ghosts that haunt the abbey — I am no 
more a coward than other men, but I don't 
hke them ; and then there is so many strange 
reports abroad, and my master — I thought I 
could have served him to the end of the world, 
but now I care not how soon I leave him, for 
his behaviour to you, ma'amselle." 

' ' You consent, then, to assist me in 
escaping ? " said Adehne with eagerness. 

"Why, as to that, ma'amselle, I would 
willingly if I knew where to go. "To be sure 
I have a sister lives in Savoy, but that is a 
great way off; and I have saved a little 
money out of my wages, but that won't cany 
us such a long journey." 

"Regard not that," said Adeline; "if I 
was once beyond this forest I would then 
endeavour to take care of myself, and repay 
you for your kindness." 

"Oh I as for that, madam " 

^* '^OX, vf^VL, ?^\ex, let us consider how we 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



65 



may escape. This Jiight, sav you, this night 
— the Marquis is to return ? ' 

" Yes, ma'amselle, to-night about dark. I 
have just thought of a scheme. My master's 
horses are grazing in the forest ; we may take 
one of them, and send it back from the first 
stage; but how shall we avoid being seen? 
Besides, if we go off in the daylight, he will 
soon pursue and overtake us ; and if we 
stay till night the Marquis will be come, and 
then there is no chance. If they miss us 
boOi at the same time, too, they'll guess how 
it is, and set ofiT directly. Could you not 
contrive to go first, and wait for me till Uie 
hurly-burly's over? Then, while they're 
searching m the place undercjound for vou, I 
can slip away, and we shall be out of their 
reach before they think of pursuing us." 

Adeline agreed to the truth of all this, and 
was somewhat surprised at Peter's sagacity. 
She inquired if he knew of any place in the 
neighbourhood of the abbey where she could 
remain concealed till he came with a horse. 

"Why, yes, madam, there is a place, now 
I think of It, where you may be safe enough, 
for nobody goes near ; but they say it's 
haunted, and perhaps you would not luce to 
go there." 

Adeline, remembering the last night, was 
somewhat startled at this intelligence ; but a 
sense of her present danger pressed again 
upon ho" mind, and overcame every other 
apprehension. "Where is this place?" said 
she ; " if it will conceal me, I shall not hesi- 
tate to go." 

"It is an old tomb that stands in the 
thickest part of the forest, about a quarter of 
a mile on the nearest way, and almost a mile 
the other. When my master used to hide 
himself so much in the forest, I have followed 
him somewhere thereabouts, but I did not 
find out the tomb till t'other day. However, 
that's neither here nor there ; if you dare 
venture to it, ma'amselle, I'll show you the 
nearest way." So saying he pointed to a 
winding path on the right. Adeline having 
looked round without perceiving any person 
near, durected Peter to lead her to the tomb. 
They pursued the path till, turning into a 
gloomy, romantic part of the forest, almost 
impervious to the rays of the sun, they came 
to the spot whither Louis had formerly traced 
his father. 

The stillness and solemnity of the scene 
struck awe upon the heart of Adeline, who 
paused, and surveyed it for some time in 
silence. At length Peter led her into the 
interior part of the ruin, to which they 
descended by several steps. "Some old 
abbot," said he, "was formerly buried here, 
as the Marquis's people say ; and it's like 
enough that he belonged to the abbey 
vonder. But I don't see why he should take 
It in his head to walk ; he was not murdered, 
surely?" 



"I hope not," said Adeline. 

"That's more than can be said for all that 
lies buried at the abbey, though " 

Adeline interrupted him. " Hark ! surely I 
hear a noise," said she. "Heaven protect 
us from discovery I " They listened, but all 
was still, and they went on. Peter opened a 
low door, and they entered upon a dark 
passage, frequently obstructed by loose frag- 
ments of stone, and along wliich they moved 
with caution. 

" Whither are we going ? " said Adeline. 

" I scarcely know myself," said Peter, "for 
I never was so far before ; but the place 
seems quiet enough." Something obstructed 
his way ; it was a door, which yielded to his 
hand, and discovered a kind of cell, ob- 
scurely seen by the twilight admitted through 
a grate above. A partial gleam shot athwart 
the place, leaving the greater part of it ^in 
shadow. 

Adeline sighed as she surveyed it. " ITiis 
is a frightful spot," said she ; "but if it will 
afford me a shelter it is a palace. Remember, 
Peter, that my peace and honour depend 
upon your faithfulness ; be both discreet and 
resolute. In the dusk of the evening I can 
pass from the abbey with the least danger of 
being observed, and in this cell I will wait 
your arrival. As soon as Monsieur and 
Madame La Motte are engaged in searching 
the vaults, you will bring here a horse ; three 
knocks upon the tomb shall inform me of 
your arrival. For Heaven's sake be cautious, 
and be punctual ! " 

"I will, ma'amselle, let come what may." 

They reascended to the forest, and Ade- 
line, fearful of observation, directed Peter to 
run first to the abbey, and invent some 
excuse for his absence if he had been missed. 
When she was again alone, she 3rielded to a 
flood of tears, and indulged the excess of her 
distress. She saw herself without friends, 
without relations, forlorn, destitute, and 
abandoned to the worst of evils. Betrayed 
by the very persons to whose comfort she had 
so long administered, whom she had loved as 
her protectors, and revered as her parents ! 
These reflections touched her heart with the 
most afflicting sensations, and the sense of 
her immediate danger was for a while ab- 
sorbed in the grief occasioned by a discovery 
of such guilt in others. 

At length she roused all her fortitude, and 
turning towards the abbey, endeavoured to 
await with patience the hour of evening, and 
to sustain an appearance of composure in the 
presence of Monsieiu: and Madame La Motte. 
For the present she wished to avoid seeing 
either of them, doubting her ability to dis- 
guise her emotions. Having reached the 
abbey, she therefore passed on to her cham- 
ber. Here she endeavoured to direct her 
attention to indifferent subjects, but in vain ; 
the danger of her situation, and the se,^^t^ 



66 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



disappointment she had received in the cha- 
racter of those whom she had so much 
esteemed, and even loved, pressed hard upon 
her thoughts. To a generous mind, few cir- 
cumstances are more afflicting than a dis- 
covery of perfidy in those whom we have 
trusted, even though it may fail of any abso- 
lute inconvenience to ourselves. The be- 
haviour of Madame La Motte in thus, by 
concealment, conspiring to her destruction, 
particularly shocked her. 

" How has my imagination deceived me I " 
said she, "what a picture did it draw of the 
goodness of the world ! And must I then 
believe that ever>*body is cruel and deceitful? 
No : let me still bt* deceived, and still suffer, 
rather than be condemned to a state of such 
wretched suspicion." 

She now endeavoured to extenuate the 
conduct of Madame La Motte, by attributing 
it to a fear of her husband. 

"She dare not oppose his >vill," said she, 
"else she would warn me of my danger and 
assist me to escape from it. No ; I will 
never believe her capable of conspiring my 
ruin. Terror alone keeps her silent." 

Adeline was somewhat comforted by this 
thought. The benevolence of her heart 
taught her, in this instance, to sophisticate. 
She perceived not that by ascribing the con- 
duct of Madame La Motte to terror she only 
softened the degree of her guilt, imputing it 
to a motive less depraved, but not less selfish. 
She remained in her chamber till summoned 
to dinner, when, diying her tears, she de- 
scended with faltering steps and a palpitating 
heart to the parlour. When she saw La 
Motte, in spite of all her efforts, she trembled 
and grew pale ; she could not behold, even 
with apparent indifference, the man who she 
knew had destined her to destruction. He 
observed her emotion, and, inquiring if she 
was ill, she saw the danger to which her agi- 
tation exposed her. Fearful lest La Motte 
should suspect its true cause, she rallied all 
her spirits, and, with a look of complacency, 
answered she was well. 

During dinner she preserved a degree of 
composure that effectually concealed the varied 
anguish of her heart. When she looked at 
La Motte, terror and indignation were her 
predominant feelings, but when she regarded 
Madame La Motte it was otherwise. Grati- 
tude for her former tenderness had long been 
confirmed into affection, and her heart now 
swelled with the bitterness of grief and dis- 
appointment. Madame La Motte appeared 
depressed, and said little. La Motte seemed 
anxious to prevent thought, by assuming a 
fictitious and unnatural gaiety ; he laughed 
and talked, and threw off frequent bumpers 

of wme— it was the mirth of despera- 
tion. ^ 

r..c^olit'3\^^Z"® alarmed, and would have 
restrainea him, but he persisted in his liba- 



tions to Bacchus, till reflection seemed to be 
almost overcome. 

Madame I^ Motte, fearful that in the care- 
lessness of the present moment he might 
betray himself, withdrew with Adeline to 
another room. Adeline recollected the happy 
hours she once passed with her, when con- 
fidence banished reserve, and sympathy and 
esteem dictated the sentiments of friendship. 
Now those hours were gone for ever, she 
could no longer unbosom her griefs to Ma- 
dame La Motte, no longer esteem her. Yet, 
notwithstanding all the danger to which she 
was exposed by the criminal silence of the 
latter, she could not converse with her 
consciously for the last time, without feeling 
a degree of sorrow, which wisdom may oiB 
weakness, but to which benevolence will 
allow a softer name. 

Madame La Motte, in her conversation, 
appeared to labour under an almost equal 
oppression with Adeline. Her thoughts were 
abstracted from the subject of discourse, and 
there were long and frequent intervals of 
silence. Adeline more than once caught her 
gazing with a look of tenderness upon her, 
and saw her eyes fill >vith tears. By this 
circumstance she was so much affected, tliat 
she was several times upon the point of 
throwing herself at her feet, and imploring 
her pity and protection. Cooler reflection 
showed her the extravagance and danger of 
this conduct. She suppressed her emotions, 
but they at length compelled her to with- 
draw from the presence of Madame La 
Motte. 

CHAPTER X. 

Thou ! to whom the world unknown 
With all its shadowy shapes is shown ; 
Who seest appall'd th' unreal scene. 
While fancy lifts the veil between ; 
Ah, Fear ! ah, frantic Fear ! 
I see, I see thee near ! 
I know thy hurry'd step, thy haggard ey« I 
Like thee I start, like thee disorcter'd fly I 

COLLtHS. 

Adeline anxiously watched from her cham- 
ber window the sun set behind the distant 
hills, and the time of her departiue draw 
nigh. It set with uncommon splendour, and 
threw a fiery gleam athwart the woods, and 
upon some scattered fragments of the ruins, 
which she could not gaze upon with indif- 
ference. 

"Never, probably, again shall I see the 
sun sink below these hills," said she, "or 
illumine this scene ! Where shall I be when 
next it sets— where this time to-morrow? 
sunk, perhaps, in misery I" She wept at 
the thought. "A few hours," resumed 
Adeline, "and the Marquis will arrive — a 
few hours, and this abbey will be a scene of 
confusion and tumult : every eye will Ije in 
search of me, every recess will be explored." 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 67 

These reflections inspired her with new terror, times they glimmered Ijetwecn the trees, and 

and increased her impatienc: to be gone. sometimes they totally disappeared. 

Twilight gradually came on, and she now They seemed to l)e in a direction with the 

thought it sufficiently dark to venture forth ; ablx:y ; and she now remeinljcrcd. that in the 

but, before she went, she kneeled down and morning she had seen a part of the fabric 

addressed herself to Heaven. She implored through an opening in the forest. She had, 

support and inrotection, and committed her- therefore, no doubt that the li'jlits proceeded 

self to the care of the God of Mercies, from people in search of her ; whu, she 

Having done this, she quitted her chamber, feared, not fmding her at the ablx'y, might 

and passed with cautious steps down the direct their steps towards the tomb. Her 

winding staircase. No person appeared, place of refuge now seemed too m ar her 

and she proceeded through the door of the enemies to be safe, and she would have fled 

tower into the forest. She looked around ; to a more distant i)art of the forest, but 

the gloom of evening obscured every object, recollected that Peter would not know where 

V/ith a trembling heart she sought the to find her. 

path, pointed out by Peter, which led to the While these thoughts passed over her 

tomb ; having found it, she passed along mind, she heard distant voices in the wind, 

forlorn and terrified. Often did she start as and was hastening to conceal herself in the 

the breeze shook the light leaves of the cell, when she observed the lights suddenly 

trees, or as the bat flitted by, gamboling in disappear. All was soon after hushed in 

the twilight ; and often, as sne looked back silence and darkness, yet she endeavoured to 

towards the abbey, thought she distin- find the way to the cell. She remembered the 

guished, amid the deepening gloom, the situation of the outer door and of the pas- 

ngures of men. Having proceeded some sage, and having passed these, she uiicloscd 

way, she suddenly heard the feet of horses, the door of tlie cell. Within, it was utterly 

and soon after a sound of voices, among dark. She trembled violently, but entered ; 

which she distinguished that of the Mar- and, having felt about the walls, at length 

quis ; they seemed to come from the quarter seated herself on a projection of stone, 

she was approaching, and evidently ad- She here again addressed herself to Heaven, 

vanoed. Terror for some minutes arrested and endeavoured to reanimate her spirits till 

her steps ; she stood in a state of dreadful Peter should arrive. Alx)ve half an hour 

hesitation ; to proceed was to run into the elapsed in this gloomy recess, and no sound 

hands of the Marquis ; to return was to fall foretold his approach. Her spirits sank, she 

into the power of La Motte. feared some part of their plan was discovered 

After remaining for some time uncertain or interrupted, and that he was detained by 
whither to fly, the sounds suddenly took a La Motte. This conviction operated some- 
different direction, and the party wheeled times so strongly upon her fears as to urge 
towards the abbey. Adeline had a short her to quit the cell alone and seek in flight 
cessation of terror. She now understood her only chance of escape. 
that the Marquis had passed this spot only While this design was fluctuating in her 
in his way to the abbey, and she hastened mind, she distinguished through the grate 
to secrete herself in the ruin. At length, above a clattering of hoofs. The noise ap- 
after much difficulty, she reached it, the preached, and at length stopped at the tomb, 
deep shades almost concealing it from her In the succeeding moment she heard three 
search. She paused at the entrance, awed strokes of a whip ; her heart beat, and for 
by the solemnity that reigned within, and some moments her agitation was such that she 
the utter darkness of the place ; at length made no effort to quit the cell. The strokes 
she determined to watch without till Peter were repeated ; she now roused her spirits, 
should arrive. " If any person approaches," and stepping forward, ascended to the forest, 
said she, "I can hear them before they can She called " Peter 1" for the deep gloom 
see me, and I can then secrete myself in would not permit her to distinguish either 
the cdl." man or horse. She was quickly answered. 

She leaned against a fragment of the tomb "Hushi ma'amselle, our voices will betray 

in trembling expectation, and, as she lis- us." 

tened, no sound broke the silence of the They mounted and rode off as fast as the 
hour. The state of her mind can only be darkness would permit. Adeline's heart re- 
imagined, by considering that upon the vived at every step they took. She inquired 
present time turned the crisis of her fate, what had passed at the abbey, and how he 
"They have now," thought she, "disco- had contrived to get away. 
vered my flight ; even now they are seeking " Speak softly, ma'amselle ; you'll know all 
me in every part of the abbey. I hear their by-and-by, but I can't tell you now." 
(h-eadful voices call me ; I see their eager He had scarcely spoke ere they saw lights 
looks." The power of imagination almost move along at a distance ; and coming now to 
overcame her. While she yet looked around, a more open part of the forest, he set on a 
she saw lights moving at a distance ; some- full gallop, and coti\m>x<^^ \N\^ '^'3^^^ <^ ^^ 



68 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



horse could hold it no longer. They looked 
back, and no lij?hts appearing, Adeline's terror 
subsided. Stie inquired again what had passed 
at the abbey when her flight was discovered. 

"You may speak without fear of being 
heard," said she ; "we arc gone beyond their 
reach, I hope." 

"Why, ma'amsulle," said he, "you had 
not been gone long before the Marquis 
arrived, and Monsieur La Motte then found 
out you had lied. Upon this a great rout 
there was, and he talked a great deal with the 
Marquis." 

"Speak louder," said Adeline ; " I cannot 
hear you." 

" I will, ma'amselle." 

"Oh, heavens!" interrupted Adeline, 
" what voice is this? It is not Peter's. For 
Ciod's sake tell me who you are, and whither 
I am going?" 

"You'll know that soon enough, young 
lady," answered the stranger, for it was indeed 
not Peter ; "I am taking you where my 
master ordered." 

Adeline, not doubting it was the Marquis's 
servant, attempted to leap to the ground, but 
the man, dismounting, bound her to the horse. 
One feeble ray of hope at length beamed upon 
her mind ; she endeavoured to soften the man 
to pity, and pleaded with all the genuine elo- 
quence of distress ; but he understood his 
interest too well to yield, even for a moment, 
to the compassion which, in spite of himself, 
her artless supplication inspired. She now 
resigned herself to despair, and, in jjassive 
silence, submitted to her fate. They con- 
tinued thus to travel till a storm of min, 
accompanied by thunder and lightning, drove 
them to the covert of a thick grove. The 
man believed this a safe situation, and Ade- 
line was too careless of life to attempt con- 
vincing him of his error. The storm was 
violent and long ; but as soon as it abated 
they set off on a full gallop ; and having 
continued to travel for about two hours, Ciime 
to the borders of the forest, and soon after to 
a high lonely wall, which Adeline could just 
distinguish by the moonlight, which now 
streamed through the parting clouds. 

Here they stopped ; the man dismounted, 
and having opened a small door in the wall, 
he unbound Adeline, who shrieked, though 
involuntarily and in vain, as he took her from 
the horse. The door opened upon a narrow 
passage, dimly lighted by a lamp that hung 
at the farther end. He led her on till they 
came to another door, which opened and 
disclosed a magnificent saloon, splendidly 
illuminated, and fitted up in the most airy 
and elegant taste. 

Tlie walls were painted in fresco, repre- 

.senting scenes from Ovid, and hung above 

with silk drawn up in festoons, and richly 

fringed. The sofas were of a silk to suit the 

hangings. From the ceutre of the c^iliiig, 



which exhibited a scene from the Armida of 
Tasso, descended a silver lamp of Etruscan 
form ; it diffused a blaze of light, that, re- 
flected from large pier glasses, completdy 
illuminated the saloon. Busts of Horace, 
Ovid, Anacreon, TibuUus, and Petronius 
Arbiter adorned the recesses, and stands of 
flowers, placed in Etruscan vases, breathed 
the most delicious perfume. In the middle 
of the apartment stood a table, spread with a 
collation of fruits, ices, and liqueurs. No 
person appeared. The whole seemed the 
work of enchantment, and rather resembled 
the palace of a fairy than anything of human 
conformation. 

Adeline was astonished, and inquired 
where she was ; but the man refused to 
answer her questions, and, havinfi^ desired 
her to take some refreshment, left ner. She 
then walked to the windows, from which a 
gleam of moonlight discovered an extensive 
garden, where groves, and lawns, and water, 
glittering in tlie moonbeam, compcMsed a 
scenery of varied and romantic beauty. 
" What can this mean ? " said she. " Is this 
a charm to lure me to destruction?" She 
endeavoured, with a hope of escaping, to 
open the windows, but they, as weU as the 
doors, were all fastened. , 

Perceiving all chance of escape removed, 
she remained for some time a prey to sorrow 
and reflection ; but was at length drawn from 
her reverie by the notes of soft music, breath- 
ing such dulcet and entrancing sounds as 
suspended grief, and waked the soul to ten- 
derness and pensive pleasure. Adeline 
listened in surprise, and insensibly becEune 
soothed and interested ; a tender melancholy 
stole upon her heart, and subdued eveiy 
harsher feeling ; but the moment the stnun 
ceased, the enchantment dissolved, and she 
returned to a sense of her situation. 

Again the music sounded : 

Music such as charmeth sleep. 

And again she gradually yielded to its sweet 
magic. A female voice, accompanied by a 
lute, a hautboy, and a few other mstnimaits, 
now gradually swelled into a tone so exquisite, 
as raised attention into ecstasy. It simk by 
degrees, and touched a few simple notes with 
pathetic softness, when the measure was 
suildenly changed, and in a gay and airy 
melody Adeline distinguished the following 
words : 

SONG. 

Life's a varied, bright illusion, 
Joy and sorrow — light and shade ; 

Turn from sorrow's dark sufifusion. 
Catch the pleasures ere they fade. 

Fancy paintswith hues unreal. 
Smile of bliss, and sorrovr's mood ; 

If they both are but ideal. 
Why reject the seaming good ? 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



69 



Hence I no moi^ ! 'tis Wisdom calls ye. 
Bids ye court Time's present aid. 

The future trust not — hope enthrals ye, 
Catch the pleasures ere they fade. 

The music ceased, but the sounds still 
vibrated on her imagination, and she was 
sunk in the pleasing languor they had 
inspired, when the door opened, an<l the 
Marquis de Montalt appeared. He ap- 
proached the sofa where Adeline sat, and 
addressed her, but she heard not his 
voice — she had fainted. He endeavoured 
to recover ho*, and at length succeeded ; 
but when she unclosed her eyes, and again 
beheld him, she relapsed into a state of 
insensibility, and having in vain tried various 
methods to restore her, he was obliged to call 
assistance. Two young women entered, and 
when she began to revive, he left them to 
prepare her for his reappearance. When 
Adeline perceived that the Marquis was gone, 
and that she was in the care of women, her 
spirits gradually returned, she looked at her 
attendants, and was surprised to see so much 
ele^nce and beauty. 

Some endeavour she made to interest their 
pity, but they seemed wholly insensible to 
her distress, and began to talk of the Marquis 
in terms of the highest admiration. They 
assured her it would be her own fault if she 
was not happy, and advised her to appear so 
in his presence. It was with the utmost 
difficulty that Adeline forbore to express the 
disdain which was rising to her lips, and that 
she b'stened to their discourse in silence. But 
she saw the inconvenience and fmitlessncss 
of opposition, and she commanded her feel- 
ing. 

They were thus proceeding in their praises 
of the Marquis, when he himself appeared, 
and, waving his hand, they immediately 
quitted the apartment. Adeline beheld him 
with a kind of mute despair, while he ap- 
proached 2JD/k took her hand, which she 
nastily withdrew, and turning to him with a 
look of unalterable distress, burst into tears. 
He was for some time silent, and appeared 
softened by her anguish. IBut again ap- 
proaching, and addressing her in a gentle 
voice, he entreated her pardon for the step 
which despair, and, as he called it, love had 
prompted. She was too much absorbed in 
grief to reply, till he solicited a return of his 
love, when sorrow yielded to indignation, and 
she reproached him with his conduct. He 
pleaded that he had long loved and sought 
her upon honourable terms, and his offer of 
those terms he began to repeat ; but raising 
his eyes towards Adeline, he saw in her looks 
the contempt which he was conscious he 
deserved. 

For a moment he was confused, and seemed 
to understand both that his plan was dis- 
covered and his person despised ; but soon 
resuminjr hi? usml command of feature, he 



again pressed his suit, and sohcitcd her 
love. 

A little rv.'flection showed Adeline the danger 
of exaspcr.uing his pride by an avowal of the 
contempt which his pretended offer of mar- 
riage excited, and she thought it not im- 
proper, upon an occasion in which the 
honour and peace of her life was concerned, 
to yield somewhat to the policy of dissinm- 
lation. She saw that her only chance of es- 
caping his designs depended upon deliying 
thein, and she now wished him to Ix-Iieve 
her ignorant that the Marcliioness was living, 
and that his offers were delusive. 

He observed her pause, and, in the eager- 
ness to turn her hesitation to his advantage, 
renewed his proposal with increased vehe- 
mence. 

" To-morrow shall unite us, lovely Adeline 
— to-morrow you shall consent to Ijccoum the 
Marchioness de Montalt. You will ih.'n re- 
turn my love and " 

" You must first deserve my esteem, my 
k)rd." ^ 

" I will — I do deserve it. Are you not now 
in my power, and do I not forbear to take 
advantage of your situation ? Do I not make 
you the most honourable proposals?" 

Adeline shuddered. 

" If you wish I should esteem you, my lord, 
endeavour, if possible, to make me forget by 
what means I came into your power ; if your 
views are, indeed, honourable, ]5rove them so 
by releasing me from my confinement." 

" Can you then wish, lovely Adeline, to fly 
from him who adores you?" replied the Mar- 
quis, with a studied air of tenderness. "Why 
will you exact so severe a proof of my disin- 
terestedness, a disinterestedness which is not 
inconsistent with love ? No, charming Adeline, 
let mc at least have the pleasure of beholding 
you till the bonds of the church shall remove 
every obstacle to my love. To-morrow " 

Adeline saw the danger to which she was 
now exposed, and interrupted him. 

" Deserve my esteem, sir, and then you 
^yill obtain it— as a first step towards which, 
liberate me from a confinement that obliges 
mc to look on you only with terror and aver- 
sion. How can I believe your professions of 
love while you show that you have no interest 
in my happiness?" 

Thus did Adeline, to whom the arts and the 
practice of dissimulation were hitherto equally 
unknown, condescend to make use of them in 
disguising her indignation and contempt. But 
though these arts were adopted only for the 
purpose of self-preservation, she used them 
with reluctance, and almost with abhorrence ; 
for her mind vra.s habitually impregnated with 
the love of virtue, in thought, word, ind 
action, and, while her end in using them was 
certainly good, she scarcely believed iK^iA. ^^^A 
could justify ihc nveaivs. 

The Marqviis pexsisled *m\i\s ^o^VvvsXrj , 



70 



THE ROMAMCB OP THE FOREST. 



"Can you doubt the reality of that love 
wliicb. to obtain you, has urged mc to risk 
your displeasure ? But have I not consulted 
your happiness even in the very conduct 
which you condemn? I have removed you 
from a solitary and desolate ruin to a gay and 
splendid villa, where every luxury is at your 
command, and where every person shall be 
obedient to your wishes." 

" My first wish is to go hence," said 
Adeline ; " I entreat, I conjure you, my lord, 
no longer to detain me. I am a friendless and 
wretched orphan, exposed to many evils, and, 
I fear, abandoned to misfortune ; I do not 
wish to be rude, but allow me to say that no 
misery can exceed that I shall feel in remain- 
ing here, or, indeed, in being any\vhere pur- 
sued by the offers you make me." 

Adeline had now forgot her policy ; tears 
prevented her from proceeding, and she 
turned away her face to hide her emotion. 

" By Heaven, Adeline, you do mc UTong !" 
said the Marquis, rising from his seat and 
seizing her hand ; " I love — I adore you, yet 
you doubt my passion, and are insensible to 
my vows. Every pleasure possible to be en- 
joyed within these walls you shall partake, 
but beyond them you shall not go." 

She disengaged her hand, and in silent 
anguish walked to a distant part of the 
saloon; deep sighs burst from her heart, 
and, almost fainting, she leaned on a win- 
dow-frame for support. 

The Marquis followed her. "Why thus 
obstinately persist in refusing to be happy?" 
said he ; " recollect the proposal I have made 
you, and accept it while it is yet in your 
power. To-morrow a priest shall join our 
hands. Surely, being, as you are, in my 
power, it must be your interest to consent to 
this?" 

Adeline could answer only by tears ; she 
despaired of softening his heart to pity, and 
feared to exasperate his pride by disdain. 
He now led her, and she suffered him, to a 
seat near the banquet, at which he pressed 
her to partake of a variety of confectioneries, 
particularly of some liqueurs, of which he 
himself drank freely. Adeline accepted only 
of a peach. 

And now the Marquis, who interpreted her 
silence into a secret compliance with his pro- 
posal, resumed all his gaiety and spirit, while 
the long and ardent regards he bestowed on 
Adeline overcame her with confusion and in- 
dignation. In the midst of the banquet, soft 
music again sounded the most tender and 
impassioned airs ; but its effect on Adeline 
was now lost, her mind being too much em- 
barrassed and distressed by the presence of 
the Marquis to admit even the soothings of 
liarmony. 

A song was now heard, written with that 
sort of impotent art by which some volup- 
tuous poets believe they can at once conceal 



and recommend the principles of vice. Ade- 
line received it with contempt and displea* 
sure, and the Marquis, perceiving its erfect, 
presently made a sign for another composi- 
tion, which, adding me force of poetry to the 
channs of music, might withdraw her mind 
from the present scene, and enchant it in 
sweet delirium. 

SONG OF A SPIRIT. 

In the sightless air I dwell, 

On the sloiMng sunbeams play ; 
Delve the cavern's inmost cell. 

Where never y^ did dayUght stray. 

Dive beneath the green sea wsiveSf 

And gambol in the briny deeps ; 
Skim every shore that Neptune laves. 

From Lapland's plains to India's steeps. 

Oft I mount with rapid force 
Above the wide earth's shadowy sone ; 

Follow the day- star's flaming course 

Through realms of space to thou^it unknown. 

And listen to celestial sounds 
That swell the air, unheard of men. 

As I watch my nightly rounds 
O'er woody steep, and sUent glen. 

Under the shade of waving trees, 
On the green bcmk of fountain clear. 

At pensive eve I sit at ease, 

while dying music murmurs near. 

And oft, on point of airy clift. 
That hangs upon the western main, 

I watch the eay tints passing swift. 
And twilight veil the liquid plahu 

Then when the breeze has sunk away. 

And ocean scarce is heard to lave. 
For me the sea-nymphs softly play 

Their dulcet shells beneath tne wave. 

Their dulcet shells ! I hear them now. 
Slow swells the strain upon mine ear ; 

Now faintly falls — now warbles low. 
Till rapture melts into a tear. 

The ray that silvers o'er the dew, 
And trembles throug^h the leafy shade, 

And tints the scene ^nth softer Ime, 
Calls me to rove the lonely glade ; 

Or hie me to some ruin'd tower. 
Faintly shown by moonlight gleam, 

Where the lone wanderer owns my power 
In shadows dire that substance seem. 

In thrilling sounds that murmur woe. 
And pausing silence makes more dread ; 

In music breathing from below 
Sad, solemn strams, that wake the dead. 

Unseen I move — unknown am fear'd ! 

Fancy's wildest dreams I weave ; 
And oft by bards my voice is heard 

To die along the gales of eve. 

When the voice ceased, a moumfiil strahii 
played with exquisite expression, sounded 
from a distant horn ; sometimes the notes 
floated on the air in soft undulations — now 
they swelled into full and sweeping melody, 
and now died faintly into silence ; when again 
XYiey lOSQ ^ivOl \xe;sx^\edL Vcl vrasiLds so sweetly 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. yt 

tender, as drew tears from Adeline, and ex- she had seen from the saloon. They were 

clamations of rapture from the Marquis. He now fastened, and her efforts to move them 

threw his arms around her, and would have were ineffectual ; at length she gave up the 

pressed her towards him, but she liberated attempt. A door next attracted her notice, 

herself from his embrace, and with a look, which she found was not fastened ; it opened 

on which was impressed the firm dignity of upon a dressing-closet, to which she descended 

virtue, yet touched with sorrow, she awed him by a few steps ; two windows appeared, she 

to forbearance. Conscious of a superiority, hastened towards them ; one refused to yield, 

which he was ashamed to acknowledge, and but her heart l>eat with sudden joy when the 

endeavouring to despise the influence which he other opened to her touch. 

could not resist, he stood for a moment the In the transport of the moment she forgot 

slave of virtue, though the votary of vice, that its distance from the ground might yet 

Soon, however, he recovered his confidence, deny the escape she meditated. She retumwl 

and b^[an to plead his love ; when Adeline, to lock the door of the closet to prevent a 

no longer animated by the spirit she had surprise, which, however, ^^•as unnccessar\-, 

lately shown, and sinking beneath the languor that of the bedroom being already securcrl. 

and fatigue which the various and violent She now looked out from the window ; the 

agitations of her mind produced, entreated he garden lay before her, and she perceived that 

would leave her to repose. the window, which descended to the floor, 

The paleness of her countenance, and the was so near the ground that she might jump 

tremuloustone of her voice, were too expressive from it with ease. Almost in the moment she 

to be misunderstood ; and the Marquis, bid- perceived this she sprang fonvard and alighted 

ding her remember to-morrow, with some safely in an extensive garden, resembling more 

hesitation withdrew. The moment she was an English pleasure-ground than a scries of 

alone, she yielded to the bursting anguish of French parterres. 

her heart, and was so absorbed in grief, that Thence she had little doubt of escaping, 
it was some time before she perceived she was either by some broken fence or low part of the 
in the presence of the young women who had wall ; she tripped lightly along, for hope 
lately attended her, and had entered the played round her heart. Tlie clouds of tnc 
saloon after the Marquis quitted it : they came late storm were now dispersed, and the moon- 
to conduct her to her apartment. She light, which slept on the lawns and spanglcrl 
followed them for some time in silence, till, the fiowers yet heavy with rain-drops, afforded 
prompted by desperation, she again en- her a distinct view of the surrounding scenery, 
deavoured to awaken their compassion ; but She followed the direction of the high wall 
again the praises of the Marquis were re- that adjoined the chateau, till it was concealed 
peated, and perceiving that all attempts to from her sight by a thick wilderness, so en- 
mterest them in her favour were in vain, she tangled with boughs and obscured by dark- 
dismissed them. She secured the door through ness that she feared to enter, and turned into 
which they had departed, and then, in the a walk on the right ; it conducted her to the 
languid hope of discovering some means of margin of a lake overhung with lofty trees, 
escape, she surveyed her chamber. The airy The moonbeams danced upon the waters 
el^iance with which it was fitted up, and the that, with gentle undulation, jDlayed along tlic 
luxurious accommodations with which it shore, exhibiting a scene of tranquil b«iuty 
abounded, seemed designed to fascinate the which would have soothed a heart less agi- 
imagination, and to seduce the heart. The hang- tated than was that of Adeline. She sighed 
ingswereofstraw-coloured silk, adorned with a as she tranquilly surveyed it, and passed 
variety of landscapes and historical paintings, hastily on in search of the garden wall, from 
the subjects of which partook of the voluptuous which she had strayed a considerable way. 
character of the owner ; the chimney-piece, After wandering for some time through alleys 
of Parian marble, was ornamented with and over lawns without meeting with any- 
several reposing figures from the antique, thing like a boundary to the grounds, she 
The bed was ofsilk, the colour of the hangings, again found herself at the lake, and now 
richly fringed with purple and silver, and the traversed its borders with the footsteps of 
head made in form of a canopy. The steps, despair ; tears rolled down her cheeks. The 
which were placed near the bed to assist in scene around exhibited only images of peace 
ascending it, were supported by Cupids, and delight ; every object seemed to repose ; 
s^parently of soUd silver. China vases, filled not a breath wavai the foliage, not a sound 
with perfume, stood in several of the recesses, stole through the air ; it was in her bosom 
upon stands of the same structure as the only that tumult and distress prevailed. She 
toilet, which was magnificent, and ornamented st'U pursued the windings of the shore, till an 
with a variety of trinkets. opening in the woods conducted her up a 

Adeline threw a transient look upon these gentle ascent ; the path now wound along 
various objects, and proceeded to examine the side of a hill, where the ^Vootcv ^*a.'«» ^^ 
the windows, which descended to the floor deep that it vjas vnVVv ?iaw\^ ^\^o3\n.^ ^^ 
Bad opened jnto balconies towards the garden found her way; sviddex^^, \v!Qww«t» ^^ 



72 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



avenue opened to a lofty grove, and she 
perceived a light issue from a recess at some 
distance. 

She paused, and her first impulse ^'as to 
retreat ; but listening, and hearing no sound, 
a faint hope beamed upon her mind that the 
person to whom the light belonged might be 
won to favour her escape. She advanced 
with trembling and cautious steps towards 
the recess, that she might secretly observe the 
person Inifore she ventured to enter it. Her 
emotion increased as she approached, and 
having reached the bower, she beheld, through 
an open window, the Marquis reclining on a 
sofa, near which stood a table covered with 
fruit and wine. He was alone, and his 
countenance was flushed with drinking. 

While she gazed, fixed to the spot by terror, 
he looked up towanls the casement ; the light 
gleamed full upon her face, but she stayed 
not to learn whether he had obscr\'ccl her, for, 
with the swiftness of sound, she left the place 
and ran, without knowing whether she was 
pursued. Having gone a considerable way, 
fatigue at length compelled her to stop, and 
she threw herself upon the turf, almost faint- 
ing with fear and languor. She knew if the 
Marquis detected her attempting to escape, 
he would probably burst the bounds which he 
had hitherto prescribed to himself, and that 
she had the most dreadful evils to expect. 
The palpitations of terror were so strong that 
she could with difficulty breathe. 

She watched and listened in trembling ex- 
pectation, but no human form met her eye, 
no sound her ear ; in this state she remained 
a considerable time. She wept, and the tears 
she shed relieved her oppressed heart. ' ' Oh 
my father ! " said she, ' ' why did you abandon 
your child? If you knew the dangers to 
which you have exposed her, you would surely 
pity and relieve her. Alas I shall I never find 
a friend ? Am I destined still to trust and be 
deceived? Peter, too, could he be trea- 
cherous?" She wept again, and then re- 
turned to a sense of her present danger, nnd 
to a consideration of the means of escaping 
it, but no means appeared. 

To her imagination the grounds were 
boundless ; she had wandered from lawn to 
lawn and from grove to grove without per- 
ceiving any termination to the place ; the 
garden wall she could not find, but she re- 
solved neither to return to the chftteau nor to 
relinquisli her search. As she was rising to 
depart she perceived a shadow move along 
the ground at some distance ; she stood still 
to observe it. It slowly advanced and then 
disappeared, but presently she saw a person 
emerge from the gloom and approach the 
spot where she stood. She had no doubt 
that the Marquis had observed her, and she 
ran with all possible speed to the shade of 
some woods on the left. Footsteps pursued 
Aer, and she heard hemame repeated, while 



she in vain endeavoured to quicken her 
pace. 

Suddenly the sound of pursuit tamed, and 
sank away in a different direction. Sbe 
paused to take breath ; she looked aroond, 
and no person appeared. She now proceeded 
slo>vly along the avenue, and had almost 
reached its termination, when she saw the 
same figure emerge from the woods and dart 
across the avenue ; it instantly pursued her 
and approached. A voice call«i her, but she 
was gone beyond its reach, for she bad sank 
senseless upon the ground. It was long 
before she rc\nved ; when she did, she found 
herself in the arms of a stranger, and made 
an effort to disengage herself. 

" Fear nothing, lovely Adeline," said he, 
' ' fear nothing ; you are in the anns of a 
friend, who will encounter anj hajcard for 
your sake, who will protect you with his life." 

He pressed her gently to his hoM. 

"Have you then forgot me?" continued 
he. 

She looked earnestly at him, and was now 
convinced that it was Theodore who spoke. 
Toy was her first emotion, but, reoonecting 
nis former abrupt departure, at a time so 
critical to her safety, and that he was the 
friend of the Marquis, a thotisand sensations 
struggled in her breast, and overwhelmed her 
witli mistrust, apprehension, and disappoint- 
ment. 

Theodore raised her from the ground, and 
while he yet supported her : " Let us im- 
mediately fly from this place," said he ; "a 
carriage waits to receive us ; it shall go 
wherever you direct, and convey you to your 
friends." 

This last sentence touched her heart. 

"Alas, I have no friends I " said she, "nor 
do I know whither to go." 

Theodore gently pressed her hand between 
his, and, in a voice of the softest compassion, 
said : 

"My friends, then, shall be yours; saffer 
me to lead you to them. But I am in agony 
while you remain in this place ; let as hasten 
to quit it." 

Adeline was going to reply, when voices 
were heard among the trees, and Theodore, 
supporting her with his arm, hurried her 
along the avenue. They continued their 
flight till Adeline, panting for breath, could 
go no farther. 

Having paused awhile, and heard no foot- 
steps in pursuit, they renewed their course. 
Theodore knew that they were now not fifir 
from the garden wall, but he was also aware 
that in the intermediate space se\'eral paths 
wound from remote i>arts of the grounds 
into the walk he was to pass, from whence 
the Marquis's people might issue and inter- 
cept him. He, however, concealed his appre- 
VvcTvsAows \toTO. KOk!cV\Ttfi, aivd endeax'ourea to 
soo\2a& and sw^^tvYwa %'<j^\&. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



n 



At length tbey reached the wall, and Theo- 
dore was leading her towards a low part of it, 
near which stcod the carriage, when again 
they heard voices in the air. Adeline's spirits, 
and strength were nearly exhausted, but she 
made a last effort to proceed, and she now 
saw the ladder at some distance by which 
Theodore had descended to the garden. 

"Exert yourself yet a little longer," said 
he, " and you will be in safety." 

He hela the ladder while she ascended : 
the top of the wall was broad and level, and 
Adeline, having reached it, remained there 
till Theodore followed and drew the Lidder to 
the other side. 

When they -had descended, the carriage 
appeared in waiting, but without the driver. 
'Fheodore feared to call, lest his voice should 
betray him ; he therefore put Adeline into 
the carriap^, and went himself in search of 
the posUUion, whom he found asleep under a 
tree at some distance. Having awakened 
him, they returned to the vehicle, which socn 
drove furiously away. Adeline did not yet 
dare to believe herself safe, but, after pro- 
ceeding a considerable time without inter- 
ruption, ioy burst upon her heart, and she 
tluinked her deliverer in terms of the warmest 
gratitude. The sympathy expressed in the 
tone of his voice and manner proved that 
his happiness on this occasion almost equalled 
bo: own. 

As reflection gradually stole upon her mind, 
anxiety superseded joy. In the tumult of the 
late moments she thought only of escape, but 
the circumstances of her present situation 
now appeared to her, and she became silent 
and pensive. She had no friends to whom 
die could fly, and was going with a young 
chevalier, almost a stranger to her, she knew 
not whither. She remembered how often she 
had been deceived and betrayed where she 
trusted most, and her spirits sank ; she re- 
membered also the former attention which 
Theodore had shown her, and dreaded lest 
his conduct might be prompted by a selfish 
passion. She saw this to be possible, but she 
disdained to believe it probable, and felt that 
nothing could give her greater pain than to 
doubt the integrity of Theodore. 

He interrupted her reverie, by recurring to 
her late situation at the abbey. 

"You would be much surprised," said he, 
"and, I fear, offended, that I did not attend 
my appointment at the abbey, after the 
alarming hints I had given you at our last 
interview. That circumstance has, perliaps, 
mjured me in your esteem, if, indeed, I was 
ever so happy as to possess it ; but my de- 
signs were ovemiled by those of the Marquis 
de Montalt, and I think I may venture to 
assert that my distress upon this occasion 
was, at least, equal to your apprehensions." 

Adeline said she had been much alarmed 
by ihe hints he had given her, and by his 



failing to afford further information concern- 
ing the subject of her danger ; and 

She checked the sentcnci: that hung upon 
her lips, for she perceived that she was un- 
warily disclosing the interest he held in her 
heart. There were a few moments of silenco, 
and neither i)arty seemed perfectly at t^so. 
Theodore at length renewed the conversation : 

"Suffer me to acquaint you," said ln", 
"with the circumstances that withheld wv: 
from the inten'iew I solicited ; I am anxious 
to exculpate myself." 

Without waiting her reply, he procoedi-d 
to inform her that the Marquis had, by sonn; 
inexplicable means, learned or suspiicted the 
.subject of their last conversation, and, jx-r- 
ceiving his designs were in danger of bein;j 
counteracted, had taken effectual moans to 
prevent her obtaining further intelligence of 
them. Adeline immediately recolli"cte<l that 
Theodore and herself had been seen in the 
forest by I^ Motte, who had no doubt 
suspected their growing intimacy, and had 
taken care to inform the Marquis how likely 
he was to find a rival in his friend. 

' • On the day following that on which- 1 last 
saw you," said Theodore, "the Marquis, 
who is my colonel, commanded me to prepare 
to attend my regiment, and appointed the 
following morning for my journey. This 
sudden order gave me some surpnse, but I 
was not long in doubt concerning the motive 
of it ; a servant of the Marquis, who was 
attached to me, entered my room soon after I 
had .left his lord, and expressing concern at 
my abrupt departure, dropped some hints 
respecting it, which excited my surprise. I 
inquired farther, and was confirmed in the 
suspicions I had for some time entertained of 
the Marquis's designs upon you. 

"Jacques further informed me that our late 
interview had been noticed and mentioned to 
the Marquis. His information had been ob- 
tained from a fellow-servant, and it alarmed 
me so much, that I engaged him to send me 
intelligence from time to time concerning the 
proceedings of the Marquis. I now looked 
forward to the evening which would bring me 
again to your presence with increased im^m- 
tience ; but the ingenuity of the Marquis 
effectually counteracted my endeavours and 
wishes. lie had made an engagement to pass 
the day at the villa of a nobleman sonic 
leagues distant, and, notwithstanding all the 
excuses I could offer, I was obliged to attend 
him. Thus compelled to obey, I passed a 
day of more agitation and anxiety than I had 
ever before experienced. It was midnight 
before we returned to the Marquis's chd.teau. 
I arose early in the morning to commence my 
journey, and resolved to seek an interview 
with you before I left the province. 

" Wlien I entered the breakfast-room Ivi;^.'?* 
much surprised lo fvtvCi \\vci ^2ccq^\s ^<«^ 
already, who, comm^Ti^\Tv^ \)cv^ >ae!\.v\Vj o^. "Qc^a 



74 



THE ROMANCE OF Tff£ POXMST. 



morning, declared his intention of accom- 
panying mc as far as Chincaii. Tliiis un- 
expectedly deprived of my last hope, my 
countenance, I believe, expressed what I felt, 
for the scrutinising eye of the Marquis instantly 
changed from si'eming carelessness to dis- 
pleasure. The distance from Chineau to the 
abbey was at lea^t twelve leagues ; yet I had 
once some intention of returning from thence 
when the Marijuis should leave me, till I 
recollected the very remote chance there 
would oven tlien be of seeing you alone, and 
also, that if I was ol>ser\'ed by Ia Motte, 
it would awaken all his suspicions, and 
caution him against any future ]}lan I might 
see it expedient to attempt. I therefore pro- 
cee<led to join my regiment. 

"Jacques sent me frequent accounts of the 
openiiions of the Marquis ; but his manner 
of relating them was so very confuseil that 
they only serveil to perplex and distress me. 
His last letter, however, alarmoil nu* so much, 
that my residence in ([uarters beennit' intoler- 
able ; and, as I found it impossible to obtain 
leave of absence, I secretly left the regiment, 
and concealed myself in a collage alwut a 
mile from the ehAteau, that I might obtain 
the earliest intelligence of the Marquis's plans. 
Jacques brought me daily information, and 
at last an account of the horrible plot which 
was laid for the following night. 

"I saw little probability of warning vou of 
your danger. If I ventured near the abbev, 
La Motte might discoser me, and frustrate 
every attempt on my part to ser\'e you ; yet I 
determined to encounter this risk for' the 
chance of seeing you, and towartls evening I 
was prep;iring to set out for the forest, when 
Jacques arrived and infomied me that you 
were to he. brought to the chateau. My plan 
was thus renderetl less difficult. I learned, 
also, that the Marquis, by means of those 
retinements in luxur>' with which he is but 
loo well acquainted, designed, now that his 



the justice to believe that I am sensible of the 
impropriety of pleading my love at present, 
and have been surprised into this confessioo. 
I promise also to forbear from a renewal of 
the subject, till you are placed in a situation 
where you may freely accept or refuse the 
sincere regards I offer you. If I could, how- 
c\'er, now be certain that I possess your 
esteem, it would relieve me from nauch 
anxiety." 

Addine felt surprised that he should doubt 
her esteem for him, after the signal and 
generous service he had rendered ner ; but 
she was not yet acquainted with the timidity 
of love. "Do you then," said she, in a 
tremulous voice, " beliexv me ungrateful ? Is 
it possible I can consider your fncndly inter- 
ference in my behalf without esteeming vou?" 
Theodore immediately took her hand, and 
pressed it to his lips in silence. They were 
l)oth too much agitated to convene, and con- 
tinued to travel for some miles withoul ex- 
changing a word. 



to 
pon 



apprehen-sion of losing von was no more, 

seduce you to his wibhos, and impose uj 

pu by a tictitious marriage. Having obtained 
information concerning the situation of the 
room allotted you, I ordered a chaise to be 
in waiting, and, with a design of sealing your 
window and conducting you thence, I entered 
the garden at midnight." 

Theodore having cea.sed to speak, " I know 
not how worils can express my sense of the 
obligations I owe you," said Adeline, "or 
my gratitude for your generosity." 

"Ah! call it not generosity," he replied; 
'I it was love." Pie ixiused. Adeline was 
silent. After some moments of expressive 
emotion, he resumed: "Rut pardon this 
abnipi declaration ; yet whv do I call it 
abrupt, since my actions ha\'o alrcidv dis- 
otosed what my lips have never, till this in- 
stant, ventured to acknowledge ? " He paused 
/«a/ii. Adeline n-as still silent. • ' Yet do me 



CHAPTER Xt. 

And Hope enchanted smird, and wav'd her foMea 

hair ; 
And longer had she sung — but with a fiowQ» 
Revenge impatient rose. 

COLUNS. 

The dawn of morning now trenibled throngh 
the clouds, when the travellers stooped at 
a small ionmi to change horses. Ineodofe 
entreated Adeline to alight and take some n- 
freshmcnt. and to this she at length consented. 
But the people of the inn were not yet up, 
and it v^-as some time before the knoddng 
and roaring of the postilhon could xoose 
them. 

Having taken some slight refreshment, 
Tlieodore and Adeline returned to the car- 
riage. The only subject upon which Thcodixe 
could have spoken with interest, delicacy for- 
bade him at this time to renew ; and after 
pointing out some beautiful scenery on the 
road, and making other efforts to support a 
conversation, he relapsed into silence. His 
mind, though still anxious. \^-as now relieved 
from the apprehension that had long oppressed 
it. ^\'hen he tirst saw Adeline, her loveliness 
made a deep impression on his heart ; there 
\\-as a sentiment in her beauty which his 
mind inmiediately acknowledged, and the 
effect of which her manners and conversation 
had aftenvards confirmed. Her charms ap- 
peared to him like those since so finely des- 
cribed by an F.nglish poet : 

Oh I have you seen, kulied in the inomins dew, 

The budding rotw its infant bloom display ? 
VThtu iitsi vu virgin tints unfuid to view, 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 75 

So softj'so delicate, so sweet she came, plead his love, increased her esteem, and 

Youth's (Umaskgkwiust dawning on her cheek, flattered her pride. Adeline was lost in 

' ^^ifthlf^'d Ji3^^^^^^^^^ meditation upon subjects like the.se wh.-n .he 

postillion stopped the carnage, and, |K»mlin;; 

A knowledge of her destitute condition, to part of the road which wound down tlic 
and of the dangers with which she was en- side of a hill they had passed, said there were 
vironed, had awakened in his heart the ten- several horsemen in pursuit. Theodore im- 
derest touch of pity, and assisted the change mediately ordered him to proceed with all 
of admuation into love. The distress he possible speed, and to strike out of the great 
suffered, when compelled to leave her ex- raid into the first obscure way that offered, 
posed to these dangers, without being able to The postillion cracked his whip in the air, and 
warn her of them, can only be imagined, set off as if he was flying for life. In the 
During his residence with his regiment, his meanwhile, Theodore endeavoured to re- 
mind was the constant prey of terrors, which animate Adeline, who was sinking with terror, 
he saw no means of combating but by return- and who now thought if she could only escape 
\n% to the neighbourhood of the abbey, where the Marquis she could defy the future, 
he mi^ht obtain early intelligence of the Presently they struck into a !)ye-lane. 
Marquis's schemes, and be ready to give his screened and overshaded by thick trees, 
assistance to Adeline. Theodore again looked from tnc winrlow, but 

Leave of absence he could not request, the closing boughs prevented his secin^j far 
without betraying his design where most he enough to determine whether the pursuit con- 
dreaded it should be known, and, at length, tinned. For his sake Adeline endeavoured to 
with a generous rashness, which, though it disguise her emotions, 
defied the law, was impelled by virtue, he "This lane," said Theodore, "will ccr- 
secretly quitted his regiment. The progress tainly lead to a town or village, and then we 
of the Marquis's plan he had obser\'ed with have nothing to apprehend ; for though my 
trembling anxiety, till the night that was to single arm could not defend you against the 
decide the fate of Adeline and himself roused number of our pursuers, I have no doubt of 
all his mind to action, and involved him in a being able to interest sonic of the inhabi tints 
tumult of hope and fear, horror and expecta- in our behalf." 
tion. Adeline appeared to be comforted by the 

Never, till the present hour, had he ven- hope this reflection suggested, and Theodore 
lured to believe she was in safety. Now, the again looked back, but the windings of the 
distance Uiey had gained from the chA.teau road closed his view, and the rattling of the 
without perceiving any pursuit, increased his wheels overcame e\'ery other sound. At length 
best hopes. It was impossible he could sit he called to the postillion to stop, and having 
by the side of his beloved Adeline, and re- listened attentively, without perceiving any 
ceive assurances of her gratitude and esteem, sound of horses, he began to hope they were 
without venturing to hope for her love. He now in safety. ' ' Do you know where this 
ccmgratnlat^ himself as her preserver, and road leads ?" said he. The postillion answered 
anticipated scenes of happiness when she that he did not ; but he saw some houses 
should be under the protection of his family, between the trees at a distance, and believed 
The clouds of misery and apprehension dis- it led to them. This was most welcome in- 
appeared from his mind, and left it to the tclligence to Theodore, who looked for>vard 
sunshine ol ioy. When a shadow of fear and perceived the houses. The postillion set 
would sometunes return, or when he recol- off. "Fear nothing, my adored Adeline," 
lected, with compunction, the circumstances said Theodore, " you are now safe ; I will part 
under which he had left his regiment, stationed, with you but with life. ' ' 

as it was, up>on the frontiers, and in a time of Adeline sighed, not for herself only, but for 
war, he looked at Adeline, and her counte- the danger to which Theodore might be 
nance, with instantaneous magic, beamed exposed. 
peace upon his heart. They had continued to travel in this 

But Adeline had a subject of anxiety from manner for near half-an-hour, when they 
which Theodore was exempt ; the prospect of arrived at a small village, and soon after 
herfiituredays was involved in darkness and in- stopped at an inn, the best the place afforded, 
certitude. Again she was going to claim the As Theodore lifted Adeline from the chaise, 
bounty of strangers — again going to encounter he again entreated her to dismiss her appre- 
thc uncertainty of their kindness ; exposed to hensions, and spoke with a tenderness, to 
thehardships of dependence, or to the difficulty which she could reply only by a smile that 
of earning a precarious livelihood. These ill-concealed her anxiety. After ordering re- 
anticipations obscured the joy occasioned by freshments, he went out to speak with the 
her escape, and by the affection which the landlord, but had scarcely left the room, when 
conduct and avowal of Theodore had exhibited. Adeline observed a party of horsemen enter 
The delicacy of his behaviour, in forbearing the inn-yard, and she Vv^lOl ivo ^oviteX ^^sfc 
to take advant^e oi her present situation to were the persoivs from "wViom \}afc>j ^^. '^'^^^ 



76 THE ROMANCE OE THE FOREST. 

f:icc.s of two of them only were turned towards drew ; Theodore kept his guard, bat did not 

her. but she thought the figure of one of the advance. " I demand only to wait here till 

othr:rs not unHke that of the Marquis. the lady recovers," said he, " you understand 

Her heart was chilled, and for some mo- the alternative." The man, already ex- 

ments the powers of reason forsook her. asperated by the opposition of Theodore, 

Her first design w.is to seek concealment ; regarded the latter part of his speech as a 

Init while she considered the means, one of threat, and became determined not to rive 

the horsemen looked up to the window near up the point ; he pressed fonraurd, and wnile 

which she stood, and speaking to his com- his comrade called the men from the yard, 

panions, they entered the inn. To quit the Theodore wounded him slightly in the 

room without being obser\'e(l was impos- shoulder, and received himself mt ttndce of 

sible ; to remain there, alone and unprotected a sabre on his head. 

as she was, would be almost equally dan- The blood gushed furiously from the 

gerous. She paced the room in an agony of wound ; Theodore, staggering to a chair, 

terror, often secretly calling on Theodore, sank into it, just as the remainder of tlie 

and often wondering he did not return, party entered the room, and Adeline un- 

These were moments of indescribable suffer- closed her eyes to see him ghastly pale and 

ing. A loud and tumultuous sound of voices covered with blood. She uttered an involun- 

now arose from a distint part of the house, tary scream, and exclaiming, " Thej have 

and she soon distinguished the words of the murdered him," nearly relapied. At the 

disputants. " I arrest you in the King's sound of her voice he raised his head, and 

name," said one; "and' bid you, at your sniihng, held out his hand to her. "1 am 

peril, attempt to go from hence, except under not much hurt," he said faintly, "and shall 

a guard." .soon be better, if indeed you are recovered. " 

The next minute Adeline heard the voice of She hastened towards him, and gave her 

Theodore in reply. " I do not mean to hand. 

dispute the King's orders," said he, "and "Is nobody gone for a surgeon?" said 

give you my word of honour not to go with- she, with a look of agonv. 

out you; but first unhand me, that I may " Do not be alarmed,' sud Theodore^ "I 

return to that room ; I have a friend tlicre am not so ill as you imagine." 

whom I wish to speak with." To this pro- The room was now crowded with people, 

posal they at first objected, considering it whom the report of the affray had Inougbt 

merely as an excuse to obtain an opportunity together ; among these was a man, \»ho acted 

of escaping ; but, after much altercation and as physician, apothecary, and siugeon to the 

entreaty, his request was granted. He sprang \'illage, and who now stepped forward to the 

forward towards the room where Adeline re- assistince of Theodore, 

mained, while a sergeant and coriDoral fol- Having examined the wound, he dedined 

lowed him to the door ; the two soldiers went giving his opinion, but ordered the patient 

out into the yard of the inn to watch the to be immediately put to bed, to which the 

windows of the apartment. officers objected, alleging that it was their 

With an eager hand he unclosed the door, duty to carrj' him to the regiment. "That 

but Adeline hastened not to meet him, for cannot be done without great danger to 1^ 

she had fainted almost at the beginning of life," replied the doctor ; "and " 

. the dispute. Theodore ciiUed loudly for "Oh; his life," said the seigeant, "we 

assistance, and the mistress of the inn soon have nothing to do with that ; we must do 

appeared with her stock of remedies, which our duty." 

were administered in vain to Adeline, who Adeline, who had hitherto stood in 
remained insensible, and by breathing alone trembling anxiety, could now no longer be 
gave signs of her existence. The distress of silent. " Since the surgeon," said she, " has 
Theodore was in the meantime heightened declared it as his opinion, that this gentle- 
by the appearance of the officers, who, man cannot be removed in his present con- 
laughing at the discovery of his pretended dition without endangering his life, you will 
friend, declared they could wait no longer, remember that if he dies yours will probably 
Saying this, they would have forced him answer it." 

from the inanimate form of Adeline, over " Yes," rejoined the surgeon, who was un- 
whom he hung in unutterable anguish, when willing to relinquish liis patient, " I declare 
fiercely turning upon them, he drew his before these witnesses that he cannot be re- 
sword, and swore no power on earth should moved with safety ; you will do wdl, there- 
force him away before the lady recovered. fore, to consider the consequences. He has 

The men, enraged by the action and the received a very dangerous wound, which 

determined air of Theodore, exclaimed, requires the most careful treatment, and the 

"Do you oppose the King's orders?" and event is even then doubtful ; but if he travds 

advanced to seize him ; but he presented the a fever may ensue, and the wound will then 

point of his sword, and bade them al their be mortal." 

peril approach. One of them immedialeVy TYv^iQdoift Yveax^ ^Ma sKDMson^ 'wjiw oom- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



77 



posure, but Adeline could with difficulty 
conceal the anguish of her heart ; she sum- 
moned aU her fortitude to suppress the tears 
that struggled in her eyes ; and though she 
wished to interest the humanity or to awaken 
the fears of the men in behalf of the un- 
fortimate prisoner, she dared not trust her 
voice with utterance. 

From this internal struggle she was relieved 
by the compassion of tlie people who filled 
the xxMm, and, becoming clamorous in the 
cause of Theodore, declared the officers 
would be guilty of murder if they removed 
him. 

•* Why, he must die, at any rate," said the 
sergeant, " for quitting his post, and drawing 
upon me in the execution of the King's 
orders. " 

A faint sickness came over the heart of 
Adeline, and she leaned for support against 
Theodore's chair, whose concern for himself 
was for a while suspended in his anxiety for 
her. He supported her with his arm, and 
forcing a smile, said in a low voice, which she 
could only hear : 

" This is a misrepresentation ; I doubt not, 
when the aSair is inquired into, it will be 
settled without any serious consequences." 

Adeline knew these words were uttered only 
to console her, and therefore did not give 
much credit to them, though Theodore con- 
tinued to repeat similar assurances of his 
safety. Meanwhile, the mob, whose compas- 
sion for him had been gradually excited by 
the obduracy of the officer, were now roused 
to pity and indignation by the seeming cer- 
tainty of his punishment, and the unfeeling 
manner in which it had been denounced. In 
a short time they became so much enraged 
that, partly from a dread of further conse- 
quences, and partly from the shame which 
meir charges of cruelty occasioned, the ser- 
geant consented that Theodore should be put 
to bed till his commanding officer might 
direct what was to be done. Adeline's joy 
at this drcumstance overcame for a moment 
the sense of her misfortunes and of her 
situation. 

She waited in an adjoining room the sen- 
tence of the surgeon, who was now engaged 
in examining the wound ; and though the 
accident would in any other circumstances 
have severely afflicted her, she now lamented 
it the more because she considered herself as 
Uie cause of it, and because the misfortune, 
by illustrating more fully the affection of her 
lover, drew him closer to her heart, and 
seemed, therefore, to sharpen the poignancy 
of her affliction. The dreadful assertion 
that Theodore, should he recover, would be 
punished with death she scarcely dared to 
consider, but endeavoured to believe that it 
was no more than a cruel exaggeration of his 
antagonist. 

Upon the whole, Theodore's present danger, 



together with the attendant circumstances, 
awakened all her tenderness, and discovererl 
to her the true state of her affections. The 
graceful form, the noble, intelligent coun- 
tenance, and the engaging manners which 
she liad at first admired in Theodore, became 
afterwards more interesting by that strength 
of thought and elegance of sentiment ex- 
hibited in his conversation. His conduct 
since her escape had excited her w.irmest 
gratitude, and the danger which he had now 
encountered in her behalf called forth her 
tenderness and heightened it into love. The 
veil was removed from her heart, and she 
saw, for the first time, its genuine emotions. 

The surgeon at length came out of Theo- 
dore's chamber into the room where Adeline 
was waiting to si)cak with him. She inquired 
concerning the state of his wound. 

"You are a relation of the gentleman's, I 
presume, madam — his sister, perhaps?" 

The question vexed and em'oarnissed her, 
and, without answering it, she rejjeated her 
inquiry. 

" Perhaps, madam, you are more nearly 
related," pursued the surgeon, seeming also 
to disregard her question ; "perhaps you are 
his wife?" Adeline blushed, and was about 
to reply, but he continued his speech. ' ' The 
interest you take in his welfare is, at least, 
very flattering, and I would almost consent to 
exchange conditions with him, were I sure of 
receiving such tender compassion from so 
charming a lady." Saying this, he bowed to 
the ground. 

Adeline, assuming a very reserved air, said : 

" Now, sir, that you have concluded your 
compliment, you will, perhaps, attend to my 
question ; I have inquired how you left your 
patient?" 

"That, madam, is, perhaps, a question 
very difficult to be resolved ; and it is like- 
wise a very disagreeable office to pronounce 
ill news — I fear he \vill die." 

The surgeon opened his snuflf-box and 
presented it to Adeline. 

"Die!" she exclaimed in a faint voice. 
"Die!" 

"Do not be alarmed, madam," resumed 
the surgeon, observing her grow pale, ' ' do 
not be alarmed. It is possible that the 

wound may not have reached the " he 

stammered; "in that case the " stam- 
mering again, " is not affected ; and if so, 
the interior membranes of the brain are not 
touched : in this case the wound may, per- 
haps, escape inflammation, and the patient 
may possibly recover. But if, on the other 
hand " 

" I beseech you, sir, to speak intelligibly," 
interrupted Adeline, "and not to trifle with 
my anxiety. Do you really believe him in 
danger?" 

" In danger, madam 1" exclaimed the sur- 
geon, "in danger I yes, certainly, in ver^ ^^-ax 



78 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



danger." Saying this, he walked away with 
an air of chagrin and displeasure. 

Adeline remained for some moments in the 
room in an excess of sorrow, which she found 
it impossible to restrain, and then drying her 
tears, and endeavouring to compose her coun- 
tenance, she went to inquire for the mistress 
of the inn, to whom she sent a waiter. 

After expecting her in vain for some lime 
she rang the bell, and sent another message 
somewhat more pressing. - Still the hostess 
did not appear, and Adeline at length went 
herself downstairs, where she found her, sur- 
rounded by a number of people, relating, with 
a loud voice and various gesticulations, the 
particulars of the late accident. Perceiving 
Adeline, she called out, " Oh ! here is ma- 
demoiselle herself," and the eyes of the 
assembly were immediately turned upon her. 
Adeline, whom the crowd prevented from 
approaching the hostess, now beckoned her, 
and was going to withdraw ; but the land- 
lady, eager in the pursuit of her story, dis- 
regarded the signal. In vain did Adeline 
endeavour to catch her eye ; it glanced every- 
where but upon her, who was iinwilling to 
attract the further notice of the crowd by 
calling out. 

•* It is a great pity, to be sure, that he 
should be shot," said the landlady, "he's 
such a handsome man ; but they say he cer- 
tainly will if he recovers. Poor gentleman ! 
he will very likely not suffer though, for the 
doctor says he will never go out of this liouse 
alive." Adeline now spoke to a man who 
stood near, and desiring he would tell the 
hostess she wished to speak with her, left the 
place. 

In about ten minutes the landlady appeared. 

" Alas I mademoiselle," said she, " your 
brother is in a sad condition ; they fear he 
won't get over it." 

Adeline inquired whether there was any 
other medical person in the tONvn than the 
surgeon whom she had seen. 

" Lord, madam ! this is a rare healthy 
place, we have little need of medicine-people 
here ; such an accident never happened in it 
before. The doctor has been here ten years, or 
thereabout ; but there's very bad encourage- 
ment for his trade ; and I believe he's poor 
enough himself. One of the sort's quite 
enough for us." 

Adeline interrupted her to ask some ques- 
tions concerning Theodore, whom the hostess 
had attended to his chamber. She inquired 
how he had borne the dressing of the wound, 
and whether he appeared to be easier after 
the operation ; questions to which the hostess 
gave no very satisfactory answers. She now 
inquired whether there was any surgeon in the 
neighbourhood of the town,' and was told 
there was not. 

The distress visible in Adeline's counte- 
nance seemed to excite the compassion of the 



landlady, who now endeavoured to console 
her in the best manner she was able. She 
advised her to send for her friends, and 
offered to procure a messenger. Adeline 
sighed, and said it was unnecessaiy. 

" I don't know, ma'amselle, what you may 
think necessary," continued the hostess, "txit 
I know I should think it very hard to die in a 
strange place with no relations near me, and 
I daresay the poor gentleman thinks so him- 
self ; and, besides, who is to pay for his 
funeral if he dies ? " 

Adeline begged she would be silent, and, 
desiring that evciy proper attention might be 
given, she promised her a reward for her 
trouble, and requested pen and ink imme- 
diately. 

"Aye, to be sure, ma'amselle, that is the 
proper way. Why, your friends would never 
forgive you if you did not acquaint them ; I 
know it by myself. And as tcr taking care 
of him, he shaU have everything the nouse 
affords ; and I warrant there is never a better 
inn in the province, though the town is none 
ol^he biggest." 

Adeline was obliged to repeat her request 
for pen and ink before the loquacious hostess 
would quit the room. 

The thought of sending for Theodore's 
friends had, in the tumult of the late scenes, 
never occurred to her, and she was now some- 
what consoled by the prospect of comfort 
which it opened for^him. Wiien the pen and 
ink were brought she wrote the following note 
to Theodore : 

" In your present condition you have need 
of every comfort that can be procured you. 
and surely there is no cordial more valuable 
in illness than the presence of a friend. Suflfer 
me therefore to acquaint your family with 
your situation ; it wiU be a satisfaction to me^ 
and, I doubt not, a consolation to you." 

In a short time after she had sent the note 
she received a message from Theodora en- 
treating most respectfully, but earnestly, to 
sec her for a few minutes. She immeduitely 
went to his chamber, where her worst appre- 
hensions were confirmed by the languor ex- 
pressed in his countenance ; and the shock 
she received, together with the stru£^le to 
disguise her emotions, almost overcame 
her. 

" I thank you for this goodness," said he, 
extending his hand, which she received ; and 
then, sitting down by the bed, she burst into 
tears. 

When her agitation had somewhat sub- 
sided, she removed her handkerchief from her 
eyes, and again looked on Theodore ; a smile 
of the tcnderest love expressed his sense of 
the interest she took in his welfare, and adr 
ministered a temporary relief to her heart. 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



79 



•* Forgive this weakness/' said she, " my 
spirits have been of late so variously agi- 
tated " 

Theodore interrupted her : " These tears 
are most flattering to my heart. But, for my 
sake, endeavour to support yourself ; I doubt 
not I shall soon be better, the surgeon " 

" I do not like him," said Adeline. " But 
tell me how you find yourself." 

He assured her that he was now much 
easier than he had been ; and, mentioning 
her kind note, he led to the subject on account 
of which he had solicited to see her. 

•• My family," said he, " reside at a great 
distance from hence, and I well know their 
affection is such that, were they informed of 
my situation, no consideration, however rea- 
sonable, could pre\'ent their coming to my 
assistance ; but before they can arrive their 
presence will probably be unnecessary." Ade- 
line looked earnestly at him. " I should pro- 
bablyl^e well," pursued he, smiling, "before 
a letter could reach them ; it would therefore 
occasion them unnecessary pain, and, more- 
over, a fruitless journey. For your sake, 
Adeline, I could wish they were here ; but a 
few days will more fully show the conse- 
quences of my wound. Let us wait, at least 
till then, and be directed by circumstances." 

Adeline foiiwre to press the subject further 
and turned to one more immediately inte- 
resting. 

" I much wish," said she, "that you had a 
more able surgeon. You know the geo- 
graphy of the province better than I do : are 
we in the neighbourhood of any town likely to 
afford you other advice ? " 

" I believe not," said he, "and this is an 
affair of little consequence, for my wound is 
so inconsiderable that a very moderate share 
of skill may suffice to cure it. But v;hy, my 
beloved Adeline, do you give way to this 
anxiety? Why suffer yourself to be dis- 
turbed by this tendency to forbode the worst? 
I am willing, perhaps, presumptuously so, 
to attribute it to your kindness, and suffer 
me to assure you that, while it excites my 

S-atitude it increases my tcnderest esteem. 
h Adeline I since you wish my speedy re- 
covery, let me see you composed ; while I 
believe you to be unhappy I cannot be well." 

She assured him she would endeavour to 
be, at least, tranquil ; and fearing the conver- 
sation, if prolonged, would be prejudicial to 
him, she left him to repose. 

As she turned out of the gallery she met 
the hostess, upon whom certain words of 
Adeline had operated as a talisman, trans- 
forming neglect and impertinence into officious 
civility. She came to inquire whether the 
gentleman above-stairs had everything that 
he liked, for she was sure it was her endeavour 
that he should have. 

" I have got him a nurse, ma'amselle, to 
• attend him, and I daresay she will do very 



well ; but I will look to that, for I shall not 
mind helping him myself sometimes. Poor 
gentleman, how patiently he bears it ! One 
would not think now that he believed he is 
going to die, yet the doctor told him so him- 
self, or at least as good." 

Adeline was extremely shocked at this im- 
prudent conduct of the surgeon, and dis- 
missed the landlady, after ordering a slight 
dinner. 

Towards evening the surgeon again made 
his appearance, and, having passed some 
time with his patient, returned to the parlour, 
according to the desire of Adeline, to inform 
her of his condition. He answered Adeline's 
inquiries with great solemnity. 

"It is impossible to determine positively 
at present, madam, but I have reason to 
adhere to the opinion I gave you this morn- 
ing. I am not apt, indeed, to form opinions 
upon uncertain grounds. I will give you a 
remarkable instance of this. 

"It is not above a fortnight since I was 
sent for to a patient at some leagues' distance. 
I was from home when the messenger arrived, 
and the case being urgent, before I could 
reach the patient another physician was con- 
sulted, who had ordered such medicines as he 
thought proper, and the patient had been 
apparently relieved by them. His friends 
were congratulating themselves upon his im- 
provement when I arrived, and had agreed 
in opinion with the physician that there was 
no danger in this case. ' Depend upon it,' said 
I, ' you are mistaken : these medicines cannot 
have relieved him, the patient is in the ut- 
most danger.' The patient groaned, but my 
brother physician persisted in affirming that 
the remedies he had prescribed would not 
only be certain but speedy, some good effect 
having been already produced by them. 
Upon this I lost all patience, and, adhering 
to my opinion that these effects were fal- 
lacious, and the case desperate, I assured 
the patient himself that his life was in the 
utmost danger. I am not one of those, 
madam, who deceive their patients to their 
last moments ; but you shall hear the con- 
clusion. 

' ' My brother physician was, I suppose, 
enraged by the firmness of my opposition, 
and he assumed a most angry look, which 
did not in the least affect me, and turning to 
the patient, desired he would decide upon 
which of om- opinions to rely, for he must 
decline acting with me. The patient did me 
the honour," pursued the surgeon, with a 
smile of complacency, and smoothing his 
ruffies, "to think more highly of me than, 
perhaps, I deserved, for he immediately dis- 
missed my opponent. 'I could not have 
believed,' said he, as the physician left the 
room, ' I could not have believed that a 
man who has been so many years in the 
profession could be SQ YfholVj \^Qt^x\ '2>\\\.' 



8o 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



Ill 



I could not have belic\'ed it either,' said 
I. 'I am astonished that he was not aware 
of my danijcr,' resumed the patient. ' I am 
astonished hkcwise,' replied I. I was resolved 
to do what I could for the patient, for he was 
a man of understanding, as you perceive, and 
I Iiad a regard for him. I therefore altered 
the prescriptions, and myself administered 
the medicines, but all would not do. my 
opinion was verified, and he died even before 
the next morning." 

Adeline, who had been compelled to listen 
to this long story, sighed at the conclusion of it. 

" I don't wonder that you are affected, 
madam," said the surgeon ; " the instance I 
have related is certainly a very affecting one. 
It distressed mc so much that it was some 
time before I could think or even speak con- 
cerning it. But you must allow, madam," 
continued he, lowering his voice and bowing 
with a look of self-congratulation, " that this 
was a striking instance of the infallibility of 
my judgment." 

Adeline shuddered at the infallibility of his 
judgment, and made no reply. 

•' It was a shocking thing for the poor 
man," resumed the surgeon. 

"It was, indeed, very shocking," said 
Adeline. 

" It aflfccted me a good deal when it hap- 
pened," continued he. 

" Undoubtedly, sir," said Adeline. 

"But time wears aNvay the most painful 
impressions." 

" I think you mentioned it was about a 
fortnight since it happened." 

" Somewhere thereabouts," replied the sur- 
geon, without seeming to understand the 
obser\'ation. 

' ' And will you permit me, sir, to ask the 
name of the jshysician who so ignorantly 
opposed you ? " 

" Certainly, madam ; it is Lafance." 

" He lives in the obscurity he deserves, no 
doubt." said Adeline. 

" Why no, madam ; he lives in a town of 
some note at about the distance of four leagues 
from hence, and affords one instance, among 
many others, that the public opinion is 
generally erroneous. You will hardly believe 
it, but I assure you it is a fact, that this man 
comes into a great deal of practice, while I am 
suffered to remain here neglected, and indeed 
very little known." 

During his narrative Adeline had been con- 
sidering by what means she could discover the 
name of the physician, for the instance that 
had been produced to prove his ignorance, 
and the infallibility of his opponent, had com- 
pletely settled her opinion concerning them 
both. She now more than ever wished to 
deliver Theodore from the hands of the sur- 
geon, and was musing on the possibility when 
he. with so much self-security, developed the 
means. 



She asked him a few more questions con- 
cerning the state of Theodore's wound, and 
was told it was much as it had been, but that 
some degree of fever had come on. " But I 
have ordered a fire to be made in the room," 
continued the surgeon, " and some additional 
blankets to be laid on the bed ; these, I doubc 
not, will have a proper effect. In the mean- 
time, they must be careful to keep from him 
every kind of liquid, except some cordial 
draughts which I shall send. He will natu- 
rally ask for drink, but it must on no account 
be given to him." 

" You do not approve, then, of the method 
which I have somewhere heard of." add 
Adeline, "of attending to Nature fa these 
cases?" 

"Nature, madam," pursued he, "Nature 
i^ the most improper guide in the world. I 
always adopt a method directly contrary to 
what she would suggest, for what can be the 
use of Art if she is only to foUow Nature? 
This was my first opinion on setting out in 
life, and I have ever since strictly adncred to 
it. From what I have said, indeed, madam, 
you may, perhaps, perceive that my opinions 
may be depended on ; what they once are 
they always are, for my mind is not of that 
frivolous kind to be affected by drcum- 
slances." 

Adeline was fatigued by this discourse, and 
impatient to impart to Theodore her discovery 
of a physician ; but the surgeon seemed by no 
means disposed to leave her, and was expa- 
tiating upon various topics, and adduci^ig 
new instances of his surprising sagacity, when 
the waiter brought a message tluit S(Mne 
person desired to see him. He was, however, 
engaged upon too agreeable a topic to be 
easily prevailed on to quit it, and it was not 
till after a second message that he made his 
bow to Adeline and left the room. The 
moment he was gone she sent a note to 
Theodore, entreating his permission to call 
in the assistance of a physician. 

The conceited manners of the sui^geon had 
by this time given Theodore a very unfavour- 
able opinion of his talents, and tne last {de- 
scription had so fully confirmed it, that he 
now readily consented to have other advice. 
Adeline immediately inquired for a messenger, 
but recollecting that the residence of the phy- 
sician was still a secret, she applied to tine 
hostess, who being really ignorant of it, or 
pretending to be so, gave her no information. 
What further inquiries she made were equally 
ineffectual, and she passed some hours in 
extreme distress, while the disorder of Theo- 
dore rather increased than abated. 

When supper appeared, she asked the boy 
who waited if he knew a physician of tlie 
name of Lafance in the neighbourhood. 
" Not in the neighbourhood, madam ; but I 
know Doctor Lafance of Chancy, for I come 
from the to^vn." 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



8i 



Adeline inqcdred further, and received very 
satisfactory answers. But the town was at 
some leagues' distance, and the delay this 
circumstance must occasion again alarmed 
her ; she, however, ordered a messenger to 
be imn^dlately despatched, and, having sent 
agfain to inquire concerning Theodore, retired 
to her chamiber for the nigiit. 

The continued fatigue she had suffered for 
the last fourteen hours overcame her anxiety, 
and her harassed spirits sank to repose. She 
slept till late in the morning, and was then 
awakened bv the landlady, who came to 
inform her mat Theodore was much worse, 
and to inquire what should be done. Adeline, 
finding that the physician was not arrived, 
immediately arose, and hastened to inquire 
farther concerning Theodore. The hostess 
informed her that he had passed a very dis- 
turbed night, that he had complained of 
being voy hot, and desired that the fire in 
his room might be extinguished ; but that the 
nurse knew ner duty too well to obey him, 
and had strictly followed the doctor's orders. 

She added that he had taken the cordial 
draught rqgpularly, but had, notwithstanding, 
continued to grow worse, and at last became 
l^^t-hcaded. In the meantime the boy, who 
had been sent for the physician, was still 
«bsent. 

"And no wonder," continued the hostess ; 
"why, only consider, it's eight leagues off, 
and tne lad had to find the road, bad as it is, 
in the dark. But, indeed, ma'amselle, you 
might as well have trusted our doctor, for we 
nerer want anybody else, not we, in the town 
here ; and if I might speak my mind, Jacques 
had better have been sent off for the young 
gentleman's friends than for this strange 
doctor that nobody knows." 

After asking some further questions con- 
cerning Theodore, the answers to which 
rather increased than diminished her alarm, 
Adeline endeavoured to compose her spirits, 
and await in patience the arrival of the 
physician. She was now more sensible than 
ever of the forlomness of her own condition 
and of the danger of Theodore's, and ear- 
nestly wished that his friends could be in- 
formed of his situation ; a wish which could 
not be gratified, for Theodore, who alone 
could acquaint her with their place of resi- 
dence, was deprived of recollection. 

When the surgeon arrived and perceived 
the situation of his patient, he expressed no 
surprise ; but having asked some questions 
and given a few general directions, he went 
down to Adehne. After paying her his usual 
compliments, he suddenly assumed an air of 
importance. 

•* I am sorry, madam," said he, " that it is 
my office to communicate disagreeable intelli- 
gence, but I wish you to be prepared for the 
event which I fear is approaching." 
Adeline comprehended his meaning, and 



though she had hitherto given little faith to 
his judgment, she could not hear him hint at 
the immediate danger of Theodore without 
yielding to the influence of fc:u". 

She entreated him to acquaint her with all 
he apprehended ; and he then proceeded t«) 
say that Theodore was, as he had foreseen, 
much worse this morning than he had bcfU 
the preceding night ; and the disorder havin;; 
now affected his head, there was every rea.son 
to fear it would prove fatiil in a few hours. 
"The worst consequences may ensue," con- 
tinued he ; " if the wound becomes inflamed 
there will be very little chance of his recovery." 

Adeline listened to this sentence with a 
dreadful calnmess, and gave no utterance to 
grief either by words or tears. 

"The gentleman, I suppose, marlam, has 
friends, and the sooner you infcjrm them of 
his condition the better. If they reside at 
any distance, it is indeed too late ; but there 
are other necessary you are ill, madiim I " 

Adeline made an effort to speak, hut in 
vain, and the surgeon now called loudly for a 
glass of water ; she drank it, and a deep sij^h 
that she uttered seemed somewhat to relieve 
her oppressed heart ; tears succeeded. In the 
meantime, the surgeon perceiving she was 
better, though not well enough to listen to 
his conversation, took his leave, and promised 
to return in an hour. The physician was not 
yet arrived, and Adeline awaited his appear- 
ance with a mixture of fear and anxious hope. 

About noon he came, and having been in- 
formed of the accident by which the fever 
was produced, and of the treatment which 
the surgeon had given it, he ascended to 
Theodore's chamber ; in a quarter of an 
hour he rettuned to the room where Adeline 
expected him. 

" The gentleman is still delirious," said he, 
" but I have ordered him a composing 
draught." 

" Is there any hope, sir?" inquired Adeline. 

"Yes, madam, certainly there is hoj^e ; 
the case at present is somewhat doubtful, but 
a few hours may enable me to judge with 
more certfiinty. In the meantime, 1 have 
directed that he shall be kept quiet, and be 
allowed to drink freely ol some diluting 
liquids." 

He had scarcely, at Adeline's request, re- 
commended a surgeon, instead of the one at 
present employed, when the latter gentleman 
entered the room, and, perceiving the phy- 
sician, threw a glance of mingled surprise and 
anger at Adeline, who retired with him to 
another apartment, where she dismissed him 
with a politeness which he did not deign to 
return, and which he certainly did not de- 
serve. 

Early the following morning the surgeon 
arrived, but either the medicines or the crisis 
of the disorder had thrown Theodo\:^ \w\a vc 
deep sleep, in Yj\n.Oi \i<&iem\a&^ Vst ^n^-k^ 



82 



THE ROMANCE OF THJ& FOREST. 



hours. The physician now gave Adeline 
reason to hope for a favourable issue, and 
every precaution wtxs taken to prevent his 
being disturbed. He awoke i^erfectly sensible 
and free from fever, and his first words in- 
quired for Adeline, who soon learned that he 
was out of danger. 

In a few days he was sufficiently recovered 
to l)c removed from his chamber to a room 
adjoining, where Adeline met him with a joy 
which she found it impossible to repress ; and 
the observance of this lighted up his counte- 
nance with i^leasure ; indeed, Adeline, sensible 
to the attachment he had so nobly testified, 
and softened by the danger he had en- 
counten*d, no longer attempted to disguise 
the tenderness of her esteem, and ^\•as at 
length brought to confess the interest his first 
appearance had impressed upon her heart. 

After an hour of affecting conversation, in 
which the happiness of a young and mutual 
atlachniont occupied all their minds, and ex- 
cluded every idea not in unison with delight, 
tlif^y returned to a sense of their present em- 
barrassments : Adeline recollecting that Theo- 
dore was arrested for disobedience of orders, 
and deserting his post ; and Theodore, that 
he must shortly be torn away from Adeline, 
who would be left exposed to all the evils 
from which he had so lately rescued her. 
This thought overwhelmed his lieart with 
anguish ; and, after a long pause, he ventured 
to propose, what his wishes had often sug- 
gested, a marriage with Adeline before he 
departed from the village. This was the only 
means of prcvunting, perhaps, an eternal 
separation ; and though he saw the many 
dangerous inconveniences to which she would 
be exposL'd by a marriage witli a man circum- 
stanced like himself, yet these appeared so 
unequal to those she would other\vise be left 
to encounter alone, that his reason could no 
longer scTui)le to adopt what his affection had 
suggested. 

Adeline was for some time too much agi- 
tated to reply ; and though she had little to 
oppose to the arguments and pleadings of 
Theodore, though she had no friends to con- 
trol, and no contrariety of interests topeq^lex 
her, she could not bring herself to consent 
thus hastily to a marriage with a man of 
whom she had little knowledge, and to whose 
family and connections slie had no sort of 
introduction. At length she entreated he 
would drop the subject, and the conversation 
for tlie remainder of the day was more general, 
yet still interesting. 

That similarity of taste and opinion, which 
had at first attracted them, every moment 
now more fully disclosed. Their discourse 
was enriched by elegant literature, and en- 
deared by mutual regard. Adcl ine had enjoyed 
few opportunities of reading, but the books 
to which she had had access operating upon 
a mjad enger for knowledge, and upon a lasle 



peculiarly sensible of the beautiful and the 
elegant, had impressed all their excellencies 
upon her understanding. Theodore had re- 
ceived from nature many of the qualities of 
genius, and from education all that it could 
bestow ; to these were added, a noble inde- 
pendency of spirit, a feeling heart, and manners 
which partook of a happy mixture of dignity 
and sweetness. 

In the evening one of the officers, who, 
upon the representation of the sergeant, was 
sent by the persons employed to prosecute 
military criminals, arrived at the viUage, and 
entering the apartment of Theodore, from 
which Adeline immediately withdrew, in- 
formed him with an air ot infinite impoct- 
ance, that he should set out on the following 
day for head-quarters. Theodore answered 
that he was not able to bear the journey, and 
referred him to his ph3rsician ; but the cfficer 
replied tluit he should take no such trouUe, 
it being certain that the physician m^ht be 
instructed what to say, and that he should 
begin his journey on the morrow. "Here 
has been delay enough," said he, "already, 
and you ^viIl have sufficient business on your 
hands when you reach head-quarters ; for the 
sergeant, whom you have severdy wounded, 
intends to appear against you, and this, with 
the offence you have committed by deserting 
your post " 

Theodore's eyes flashed fire. " Deserting I" 
said he, rising from his seat, and darting a 
look of menace at his accuser, " who dares to 
brand me with the name of deserter?" But 
instantly recollecting how much his condnct 
liad appeared to justify the accusation, be 
endeavoured to stifle his emotions, and, with 
a firm voice and composed manner, said tb^ 
when he reached head-quarters, he should be 
ready to answer whatever might be brao^t 
against him, but that till then he should be 
silent. The boldness of the officer was re- 
pressed by the spirit and dignity with wbidi 
Theodore spoke these words, and muttaing 
a reply that was scarcely audible, he left the 
room. 

Theodore sat musing on the danger of his 
situation : he knew that he had much to 
apprehend from the peculiar drcumstanoes 
attending his abrupt departure from his rai- 
ment, it having been stationed in a garriscm- 
town upon the Spanish frontiers, miere the 
discipline was very severe ; and from the 
power of his colonel, the Marquis de Montalt, 
whom pride and disappointment would now 
rouse to vengeance, and probably render in- 
defatigable in the accomplishment of his des- 
truction. But his thoughts soon fled from 
his own danger to that of Adeline, and, in 
the consideration of this, all his fortitude for- 
sook him ; he could not support the idea o£ 
leaving her exposed to the e\ils he foreboded, 
nor, indeed, of a separation so sudden as t^»^ 
YiYi\c\i uov^- threatened him ; and when sbe 



The romance of the eorest. 83 

again entered the room, he renewed his soli- can be productive only of miscr>' to us 

citations for a speedy marriage, with all the both." 

arguments that tenderness and ingenuity could "Ah, Adeline I could you think thus if 

suggest. you truly loved? I see myself about to bo 

Adeline, when she learned that he was to separated, and that, perhaps, for ever, from 
depart on the morrow, felt as if bereaved of the object of my tenderost affections, and I 

her last comfort. All the horrors of his situa- cannot but express all tlie angui.sh I feel— I 

tion arose to her mind, and she turned from cannot forbear to reix\it cver>' argument that 

him in unutterable anguish. Considering her may afford even the slightest possibility of 

silence as a favourable presage, he repeated altering your determination. Kut yoii^ Adc- 

his entreaties that she should consent to be line, you look with complacency upon a cir- 

his, and thus give him a surety that their cumstance which tortures me with despair." 
separation should not be eternal. Adeline Adeline, who harl long tried to support lier 

sighed deeply at these words. "And who can spirits in his i)resence, while she adhered to a 

knowthatoursej^rationwould not be eternal," resolution which reason suggested, but which 

said she, " e\'en if I could consent to the mar- the pleadings of her heart powerfully opjwsed, 

riage you propose ? But while you hear my was unable longer to command her distress, 

determination, forbear to accuse me of indif- and burst into tears. Theodore was in the 

ference, for indifference towards you would, same moment convinced of his error, and 

indeed, be a crime after the services you have shocked at the grief he had occasioned. Pic 

rendered me." drew his chair towards her, and, taking her 

"And is a cold sentiment of gratitude all hand, again entreated her pardon, and en- 

that I am to expect of you?" said Theodore, deavoured in the tenderest accents to soothe 

•' I know that you are going to distress me and comfort her. 

with a proof of your indifference, which you " What a wretch was I to cause you this 

mistake for the suggestions of prudence, and distress, by questioning that regard with 

that I shall be reduced to look, without which I can no longer doubt you honour me I 

reluctance, upon the enls that may shortly Forgive mc, Adeline, say but you forgive me, 

await me. Ah, Adeline I if you mean to and, whatever may be the pain of this sepa> 

reject this, perhaps, the last proposal which I ration, I will no longer oppose it." 
<sin e\'er make to you, cease, at least, to " You have given me some pain," said Ade- 

deceive yourself with the idea that you love line, "but you have not offended me." 
me ; that delirium is fading even from my She then mentioned some further partl- 

mind." culars concerning the convent. Theodore 

" Can you, then, so soon forget our con- endeavoured to conceal the distress which 

versation of this morning?" replied Adeline, the approaching separation occasioned him, 

"and can you think so lightly of me as to and to consult with her on these plans with 

believe I would profess a regard which I do not composure. His judgment by degrees pre- 

fed? If, indeed, you can believe this, I shall vailed over his passions, and he now perceived 

do well to forget that I ever made such an that the plan she suggested would afford her 

acknowledgment, and you, that you heard it." the best chance of security. He considered, 

" Forgive me, Adeline, forgive the doubts what in the first agitation of his mind had 

and inconsistencies I have betrayed ; let the escaped him, that he might be condemned 

anxieties of love and the emergency of my upon the charges brought against him, 

circumstances plead for me." and that his death, should they have been 

Adeline, touUng faintly through her tears, married, would not only deprive her of 
held out her hand, which he seized and her protector, but leave her more im- 
pressed to his lips. mediately exposed to the designs of the 

"Yet do not drive me to despair by a re- Marquis, who would doubtless attend his 

jection of my suit," continued Theodore ; trial, and by this means discover that Adeline 

" think what I must suffer to leave you here was again within his reach. Astonished that 

destitute of friends and protection." he had not noticed this before, and shocked 

" I am thinking how I may avoid a situa- at the unwarincss by which he might have 

tion so deplorable," said Adeline. "They betrayed her into so dangerous a situation, he 

say there is a convent which receives boarders, became at once reconciled to the idea of 

within a few miles, and thither I wish to go." leaving her in a convent. He could have 

"A convent I" rejoined Theodore ; "would wished to place her in the asylum of his own 

3rou go to a convent ? Do you know the family, but the circumstances under which she 

persecutions you would be liable to, and that must be introduced were so painful, and, 

If the Marquis should discover you, there is above all, the distance at which they resided 

little probability that the Superior would re- would render a journey so highly dangerous 

Sist his authority, or, at least, his bribes?" for her, that he forbore to propose it. He 

" All this I have considered," said Adeline, entreated only that she would allow him to 

"and am prepared to encounter it rather than write to her ; but, recollecting that his letters 

enter into an engagement, which, at this time, might be a means of b^\.i^.^'vc^^ \\v^ ^-a^sa <i^ 



^4 THE ROMANCE OF THE POREST. 

her residence to the Marquis, he checked "Dread c?crYthing from my vengeance," 

himself. said the Marquis to Theodore, as he caught 

" I must deny myself even this melancholy the hand of Addine, who had lost all power 

pleasure," said he, "lest my letters should of resistance, and was scarcely sensiUe of 

betray your abode ; yet how shall I be able to what passed ; " diead everything from mjr 

endure the inipntience and uncertainty to vengeance ; you know you ^ha.v« deserved it ' 

which prudence condemns mc ! If you are " I defy your vengeance," cried Theodore, 

in danger, I sliall be ignorant of it ; though, "and dread only the pan^ of oonscience, 

indeed, did I know it," said he, with a look which your power cannot niflict upon me, 

of despair, ' ' I could not fly to save you. Oh though your vices condemn you to its 

exquisite misery ! 'tis now only I perceive all tortures.' 

the horrors of confinement, 'lis' now only that ' ' Take him instantly from the room, and see 

I understand all the value of lilx*rty." that he is strongly fettered," said the Mar- 

His utterance was interrupted by the violent quis ; " he shall soon know what a criminal, 

agitation of his mind ; he rose from his chair, who adds insolence to guilt, may sufiisr." 

and walked with quick paces about the room. Theodore, exclaiming, " Oh Adeline ! fture- 

Adeline sat, overcome by the description well I " was now forced cut of the room ; 

which Theodore had given of his approach- while Adeline, whose torpid senses were 

ing situation, and by the consideration that roused by his voice and his last kx>ks, fell at 

she might remain in the most terrible suspense the feet of the Marquis, and with tears of 

concerning his fate. She saw him in a prison agony implored compassion for Theod(»e; 

— pale, emaciated, and in chains ; she saw but her pleadings for his rival seemed only to 

the vengeance of the Marquis descending irritate the pride and exasperate the faaHed of 

upon him ; and this for his exertions in her the Marquis. He denoimced vengeancse on 

cause. I'heodore, alarmed by the despair his head, and imprecations too dreadful for 

expressed in her countenance, threw himself the spirits of Adeline, whom he conqjdted to 

into a chair by hers, and, taking her hand, rise ; and then, endeavouring to stifle the 

attempted to speak comfort to her, but the emotions of rage which the pfesence of 

words faltered on his lips, and he could only Theodore had excited, he began to addrea 

bathe her hand with tears. her N\ith his usual expressions of acbniraCion. 

This mournful silence was interrupted by The wretched Adeline, who, re^ganlless of 

the arrival of a carriage at the inn, and what he said, still continued to pl»d 'for her 

Theodore, arising, went to the window that unhappy lover, \\'as at length alarmed by the 

opened into the yard. The darkness of the returning rage which the coantenance cif the 

night prevented his distinguishing the objects Marquis expressed, and, exerting all bet re- 

without, but a light now brought from the maining strength, she sprang from his grasp 

house showed him a carriage and four, at- towards the door of the room ; but he seixed 

tended by several sen-ants, l^esently he saw her hand before she could reach it, and, ro- 

a gentleman, wrapped up in a roquelaure, gardless of her shrieks, bringing her beck to 

alight and enter the inn, and in the next mo- her chair, was going to speak, when voices 

ment he heard the voice of the Manjuis. were heard in the passage, and immediatdy 

He had flown to support Adeline, who was the landlord and his wife, whom Adeline^ 
sinking with terror, when the door opened, cries had alarmed, entered the apartment 
and the Marquis, followed by the officers and The Marquis, turning furiously to tbem, de- 
several servants, entered. Fury flashed from manded what they \vanted-; but not waiting 
his eyes as they glanced upon Theodore, who for their answer, he bade them attend hhn, 
hung over Adeline with a look of fearful soli- and quitting the room she heard the door 

beize that traitor, said he turning to Adeline now ran to the wmdows, which 
the officers; "why have you suffered him to were unflistened, and opened into the inn- 
remain here so long ?^ yard. Without, all was dark and silent. She 

1 am no traitor, said 1 hcodorc, with a called aloud for help, but no person appeared. 

hrm voice, and the dignity of conscious and the windows were so high, that ft was 

worth, but a defender of innocence, of one impossible to escape unassisted. She walked 

whom the treacherous Marquis de Montalt about the room in an agony of terror and 

wouw destroy. , „ .^ , , distress, now stopping to listen, and fancying 

ti..^^^^^"^ 'f^^'^^\ ^^'^ J^^ Marquis to »lie heard voices disputing below, and now 

TW?""^"".^- ^^^^»^5 shrieked, held faster by quickening her steps, as suspense Increased 

ineodorcs arm, and entreated the men not the agitation of hermind. 







same momL, „''°"^'^ ^""^ "^"^' ^"^ "^ ^^^ which increased till all waS uproar and c^ 
^^^e moment they surrounded and seized fusion. People passed quicWy th^^h^ 

Vass^^^s, ^Yvd doors were frequently opened 



TffE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



H 



and shut She called, but received no 
answer. It immediately occurred to her that 
Theodore, having heard her screams, had 
attempted to come to her assistance, and 
that the bustle had l)een occasioned by the 
opposition of the officers. Knowing their 
fierceness and cruelty, she was seized with 
fearful apprehensions for the life of Theo- 
dore. 

A confused uproar of voices now sounded 
from below, and the screams of women con- 
vinced her there was fighting ; slie even 
thought she heard the clashing of swords ; 
the image of Tlieodore, dying by the hands 
of the Marquis, now rose to her imagination, 
and the terrors of suspense became almost 
insupportable. I^e made a desperate effort 
to force the door, and again call for help ; 
but her tremUing hands were powerless, and 
every person in the house seemed to be too 
much engaged even to hear her. A loud 
shriek now pierced her ears, and amidst the 
tumult that foUowed, she clearly distinguished 
deep groans. This confirmation of her fears 
deprived her <rf all her remaining spirits, 
and growing fiunt, she sank almost lifeless 
into a diair near the door. The uproar 
gradually subsided till all was still, but nobody 
returned to her. Soon after she heard voices 
in the yard, but she had no power to walk 
across the room even to ask the questions she 
wished, yet feared, to have answered. 

About a quarter of an hour elapsed when 
the door was unlocked, and the hostess ap- 
peared with a countenance as pale as death. 

•• For God's sake," said Adeline, "tell me 
what has happened? Is he wounded? Is 
• he killed?" 

. •• He is not dead, ma'amselle, but " 

" He is dying then? Tell me where he is 
—let me go I" 

"Stop, ma'amselle," cried the hostess, 
"you are to stay here ; I only want the harts- 
horn out <rf the cupboard there." 

Adeline tried to escape by the door, but 
the hostess pushing her aside, locked it, and 
went downstairs. 

Adeline's distress now entirely overcame her, 

and she sat down motionless, and scarcely 

conscious that she existed, till roused by the 

sound of footsteps near the door, which was 

■ again opened, and three men whom she knew 

\ to be the Marquis's servants entered. She 

j- had sufficient recollection to repeat the ques- 

E tions she asked the landlady, but they 

\ answered only that she must come with 

them, and that a chaise was waiting for her 

at the door. Still she urged her questions. 

"Tell me if he lives," cried she. 

"Yes, ma'amselle, he is alive, but he is 

terribly wounded, and the surgeon is just 

come to him." 

As they spoke they hurried her along the 
passage, and, without noticing her entreaties 
and supphcations to know whither she was 



going, they had reached the foot of the stairs, 
when her cries brought se\'eral people to the 
door. To thess the hostess ruLitcd that the lady 
was the wife of the gentleman just arrived, 
who had overtaken her in her flight with a 
gallant ; an account which the Klarquis's 
servants corrolK>rated. ' ' 'Tis tlie gentlumnu 
who has just fought the duel," added the 
hostess, "and it was on her account." 

Adeline, partly disdaining to take any notice 
of this artful story, and partly from lier de.sire 
to know the particulars of what had hap|M.'ned, 
contented herself with repeating her inquiries ; 
to which one of the spectators at last replied, 
that the gentleman was desperately wounded. 
The Marquis's people would now have hurried 
her into the chaise, but she sank lifeless in 
their arms, and her condition so nmch inte- 
rested the humanity of the spectators that, 
notwithstanding their belief of what had been 
.said, they opposed tlie efforts made to carry 
her, senseless as she was, into the airriage. 

She was at length taken into a room, and, 
by proper a])plication, restored to her senses. 
There she so earnestly besought an explana- 
tion of what had happened, that the hostess 
acquainted her with some particulars of the 
late rencounter. 

" When the gentleman that was ill heard 
your screams, madam," said she, "he be- 
came quite outrageous, as they tell me, and 
nothing could pacify him. The Marquis — for 
they say he is a Manjuis, but you know Ixfst — 
was then in the room with my husband and I, 
and when he heard the uproar he went down 
to see what was the matter ; and when he 
came into the room where the CapUiin was 
he found him struggling with the sergeant. 
Then the Captain was more outrageous than 
ever, and notwithstanding he had one leg 
cliained, and no sword, he contrived to get 
the sergeant's cutlass out of the scabbard 
and immediately flew at the Marquis, and 
wounded him desperately ; upon which he 
was secured." 

" It is the Marquis then who is wounded," 
said Adeline; "the other gentleman is not 
hurt ?" 

"No, not he," replied the hostess, "but 
he will smart for it by-and-by, for the Mar- 
quis swears he will do for him." 

Adeline for a moment forgot all her 
misfortunes and all her danger in thank- 
fulness for the immediate escape of Theo- 
dore ; and she was proceeding to make 
some further inquiries concerning him, when 
the Marquis's servants entered the room, and 
declared they could wait no longer. Adeline, 
now awakened to a sense of the evils wth 
which she was threatened, endeavoiu«d to 
win the pity of the hostess, who, however, 
was, or atfected to be, convinced of the truth 
of the Marquis's story, and therefore insen- 
sMdIc to all she could urge. Again she ad- 
dressed his servauls, \iuv mN^Ytx \ >^'e^ N^^'^aiA^ 



86 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



neither suffer her to remain longer at the inn, 
nor inform her whither she was going ; but, in 
presence of several persons, already preju- 
diced by the injurious assertions of the 
hostess, Adeline was hurried into the chaise, 
and her conductors mounting their horses, 
the whole party was very soon beyond the 
village. 

Thus ended Adeline's share of an adventure, 
begun with a prospect not only of security, 
but of happiness ; an adventure which had 
attached her more closely to Theodore, and 
shown him to be more worthy of her love ; but 
which, at the same time, had distressed her 
by new disappointment, produced the im- 
prisonment of her generous and now adored 
lover, and delivered both himself and her into 
the power of a rival, irritated by delay, con- 
tempt, and opposition. 



CHAPTER XII. 

Nor sea, nor shade, nor shield, nor rock, nor cave. 

Nor silent deserts, nor the sullen grave, 

Where flamc-ey'd Fury means to frown— can save. 

The surgeon of the place having examined 
the Marquis's wound, gave him an immediate 
opinion upon it, and ordered that he should 
be put to bed ; but the Marquis, ill as he was, 
had scarcely any other apprehension than 
that of losing Adeline, and declared he should 
be able to begin his journey in a few hours. 
With this intention, he had begxin to give 
orders for keeping horses in readiness, when 
the surgeon persisting most seriously, and 
even passionately, to exclaim that his life 
would be the sacrifice of his rashness, he was 
carried to a bed-chamber, where his valet 
alone was permitted to attend him. 

This man, the convenient confidant of all 
his intrigues, had lx;en the chief instrument in 
assisting his designs concerning Adeline, and 
was, indeed, the very person who had brought 
lier to the Marquis's villa on the borders of 
the forest. To him the Marquis gave his 
further directions concerning her ; and, fore- 
seeing the inconvenience, as well as the 
danger, of detaining her at the inn, he had 
ordered him, with several other servants, to 
carry her away immediately in a hired carriage. 
The valet having gone to execute his orders, 
the Marquis was left to his own reflections, 
and to the \aolence of contending passions. 

The reproaches and continued opposition 
of Theodore, the favoured lover of Adeline, 
had exasperated his pride and roused all his 
malice. He could not for a moment consider 
this opposition, which was in some respects 
successful, without feeling an excess of in- 
dignation and inveteracy, such as the prospect 
oi a speedy revenge could alone enable him 
tP support 
When be bad discovered Adeline's escape 



from the villa, his surprise equalled his dis- 
appointment ; and, after exhausting tha 
paroxysm of his rage iipon his domestics, he 
despatched them sdl different ways in punuit 
of lier, going himself to the abbey, in the 
faint hope that, destitute as she was of other 
succour, she might have fled thither. La 
Motte, however, being as much surprised as 
himself, and ignorant of the route which 
Adeline had taken, he returned to the villa, 
impatient of intelligence, and found some of 
his servants arriv^, without any news of 
Adeline, and those who came afterwards were 
as successless as the first. 

A few days after, a letter from the lieutenant- 
colonel of the regiment informed him that 
Theodore had quitted his company, and had 
been for some time absent, nobody knew 
where. This information, confirming a sus- 
picion, which had frequently occurred to him, 
that Theodore had been, by some means or 
other, instrumental in the escape of Adeline, 
all his other passions became, for a time, sub- 
servient in liis revenge, and he gave orders 
for the immediate pursuit and dppiehension 
of Theodore ; but Theodore, in the mean- 
time, had been overtaken and secored. 

It was in consequence of having fonnerly 
obser\-ed the growing partiality between him 
and Adeline, and of intelligence received torn 
La Motte, who had noticed their interview in 
the forest, that the Marquis had resolved to 
remove a rival so dangerous to his love and 
so likely to be informed of his deagns. He 
had therefore told Theodore, in a wmimfr as 
plausible as he could, that it would be neces- 
sary for him to join the regiment — a noCioe 
which affected him only as it related to Ade- 
line, and which seemed the less extraordinaxy 
as he had already been at the villa a kuiger 
time than was usual with the officers invited 
by the Marquis. Theodore very well knew 
the character of the Marquis, and had ac- 
cepteil his invitation rather from an unwHr 
lingness to show any disrespect to his oolond 
by a refusal than from a sanguine expectation 
of pleasure. 

From the men who had apprdiended Theo- 
dore the Marquis received the informaticMi 
which had enabled him to pursue and recover 
Adeline ; but though he had now effected 
this, he was internally a prey to the corrodve 
effects of disappointed passion and exaspe- 
rated pride. The anguish of his wound was 
almost forgotten in that of his mind, and 
every pang he felt seemed to increase his 
thirst of revenge, and to recoil with new 
torture upon his heart. While he was in this 
state he heard the voice of the innocent Ade* 
line imploring protection, but her cries excited 
in him neither pity nor remorse ; and wheOf 
soon after, the carriage drove away, and be 
was certain both that she was seciured and 
TVieodote v^As vn:etched, he seemed to led 
Som(i cfcssaxvoiv ol lasuvai vx^owj , 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



87 



Theodore, indeed, did suffer all that a vir- 
tuous mmd, labouring under oppression so 
severe, could feel ; but he was, at least, free 
from Uiose inveterate and malignant passions 
which tore the bosom of the Marquis, and 
which inflict upon the possessor a punishment 
more severe than any they can prompt him to 
imagine for another. What mdignation he 
might feel towards the Marquis was at this 
time secondary to his anxiety for Adeline. 
His captivity was pdnful, as it prevented his 
seeking a just and honourable revenge ; but it 
was dreadful, as it withheld him from attempt- 
ing the rescue of her whom he loved more 
than life. 

When he heard the wheels of the carriage 
that contained ho* drive off, he felt an agony 
of despair which almost overcame his reason. 
Even the stem hearts of the soldiers who 
attended him were not wholly insensible to 
his wretchedness, and by venturing to blame 
the conduct of the Marquis thev endeavoured 
to console their prisoner. The physician, 
who had just arrived, entered the room 
during this paroxysm of his distress, and 
both feeling and expressing much concern at 
his condition, inquired with strong surprise 
^hy he had been thus precipitately removed 
to a room so very unfit for his reception. 

Theodore explained to him the reason of 
this, of the distress he suffered, and of the, 
diains by which he was disgraced ; and per- 
ceiving uie physician listened to him with 
attention and compassion, he was anxious to 
acquaint him with some further particulars, 
f<H' which purpose he desired the soldiers to 
leave the room. The men, complying with 
his request, stationed themselves on the out- 
side of the door. 

He then related all the particulars of the 
late transaction, and of his connection with 
the Marquis. The physician attended to his 
narrative with deep concern, and his counte- 
nance frequently expressed strong agitation. 
When Theodore concluded, he remained for 
some time silent and lost in thought, when, 
awaking fix)m his reverie, he said : 

"I fear your situation is desj^erate. The 
character of the Marquis is too well known to 
suffo" him either to be loved or respected ; 
from such a man you have nothing to hope, 
Ux he has scarcely anything to fear. I wish 
it was in my power to serve you, but I see no 
possibility of it." 

"Alas !" said Theodore, "my situation is 
indeed desperate, and — for that suffering 
angel " — deep sobs interrupted his voice, and 
the violence of his agitation would not allow 
him to proceed. 

The physician could only express the sym- 
pathy he feh for his distress and entreat him 
to be more calm, when a servant entered the 
room from the Marquis, who desired to see 
the physician immediately. After some time 
he said he would attend the Marquis ; and 



having endeavoured to attain a degree of 
composure which he found it difficult to 
assume, he wrung the liand of Theodore 
and quitted the room, promising to return 
befoi-e he left the house. 

He found the Marquis much agitated both 
in body and mind, and rather more appre- 
hensive for the consequences of the wound 
than he had expected. His anxiety for Theo- 
dore now suggested a plan by the executif>n 
of which he hoped he might be able to serve 
him. Having felt his patient's pulse, and 
asked some questions, he assumed a serious 
look, when the Marquis, who watched every 
turn of his countenance, desired he would, 
without hesitation, speak his opinion. 

" I am sorry to alarm you. my Ix^rd, but 
here is some reason for apprehension. How 
long is it since you received the wound ? " 

" Good God, there is danger then ! " cried 
the Marquis, adding some bitter execrations 
against Theodore. 

"There certainly is danger," replied the 
physician ; a few hours may enable me to 
determine its degree." 

"A few hours, sir ! " interrupted the Mar- 
quis. " A few hours I " 

The physician entreated him to be more 
calm. 

"Confusion!" cried the Marquis. "A 
man in health may, with great composure, 
entreat a dying man to be calm. Theodore 
will be broken upon the wheel for it, however." 

" You mistake me, sir," said the physician; 
"if I believed you a dying man, or, indeed, 
very near death, I should not have sp>oken as 
I did. But it is of consequence I should 
know how long the wound has been inflicted." 

The Marquis's terrors now began to sub- 
side, and he gave a circumstantial account of 
the affray with Theodore, representing that 
he had been basely used in an affair where 
his own conduct had been perfectly just and 
humane. The physician heard this relation 
with great coolness, and when it concluded — 
without making any comment upon it — told 
the Marquis he would prescribe a medicine 
which he wished him to take immediately. 

The Marquis, again alarmed by the gravity 
of his manner, entreated he would declare 
most seriously whether he thought him in 
immediate danger. The physician hesitated, 
and the anxiety of the Marquis increased : 
"It is of consequence," said he, "that I 
should know my exact situation." 

The physician then said that if he had any 
worldly affairs to settle it would be as well to 
attend to them, for it was impossible to say 
what might be the event. 

He tlien turned the discourse, and said he 
had just been with the young officer under 
arrest, who, he hoped, would not be removed 
at present, as such a procedure must en- 
danger his life. The Marquis uttered a 
dreadful oath, aad, c>3ix?»m^ Taao^ovfe Ssw. 



88 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



liaving brought him to his present condition, 
said he should depart A^ith the guard that 
very night. Against the cruelty of this sen- 
tence the physician ventured to esqMStulate ; 
and endcavouriog to awaken the Marquis to 
u sense of humanity, pleaded earnestly for 
Theodore. But these entreaties and argu- 
ments seemed, by displaying to the Marquis a 
part of his own character, to rouse his resent- 
ment and rekindle all the violence of his 
passions. 

The ]>hysician at length withdrew in des- 
pondency, after promising, at the Marquis's 
r«iucst, not to leave the inn. He had hoped 
by exaggerating his danger to obtain some 
advantages, both for Adeline and Theodore ; 
but the plan had quite a contrary effect, for 
the apprehension of death — so dreadful to 
t^jie guilty mind of the Marquis — instead of 
awakening penitence, increased his desire of 
vengeance against the man who had reduced 
him to such a situation. He determined to 
have Adeline conveyed where Theodore, 
should he by any accident escape, could 
never obtJiin her ; and thus secure to himself, 
at least, some means of revenge. He knew, 
however, that when Theodore was once con- 
veyed to his regiment, his destruction was 
certain ; for should he even be acquitted of 
the intention of deserting, he would be con- 
demned for having assaulted his superior 
officer. 

The physician returned to the room where 
Theodore was confined. The violence of his 
distress was now subsided into a stem despair, 
more dreadful than the vehemence which had 
lately possessed him. The guard, in com- 
pliance with his request, having left the room, 
the physician repeatiid to him some part of 
his conversation with the Marquis. Theodore, 
after expressing his thanks, said he had no- 
thing more to \\o\vt. For himself he felt little; 
it was for his family and for Adeline he suf- 
fered. He inquired what route she had taken, 
and though he had no i)rospect of deriving 
advantage from the information, desired the 
physician to assist him in obtaining it. But 
the landlord and his wife either were, or 
affected to be, ignorant of the matter ; and it 
was in vain to apply to any other person. 

The sergeant now entered with orders from 
the Marquis for the immediate departure of 
Theodore, who heard the message with com- 
posure, though the physician could not help 
expressing his indignation at this precipitate 
removal, and his dread of the conse<iuences 
that might attend it. Theodore had scarcely 
time to declare his gratitude for the kindness 
of his valuable friend before the soldiers 
entered the room to conduct him to the 
carriage n waiting. As he bade him fare- 
well, Theodore slipped his purse into his 
hand, and, turning abruptly away, told the 
soldiers to lead on ; but the physician stopped 
him, and refused the jjrescnt with such 



wannth that he was compelled to remme 
it. He then wnmg the hand of his nev 
friend, and, being unable to speak, hurried 
away. The whole jparty immediately set ofii 
and the unhappy Theodore was kn to the 
remembrance of his past hopes and sofio^ 
ings, to his anxiety for the £ate of Addfaie, 
the contemplation of his present wretcfaedaess^ 
and the apprehension of what might be rie> 
served for him in future. For himKlf be saw 
nothing but destruction ; and was only re- 
lieved from total despair by a feeble hcpe that 
she whom he loved better than himsdf nugbt 
one time enjoy that happiness of which be 
did not venture to look for a participation. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

Have you the heart ? When jrour head did but aciic^ 
I knit my hondkercher about your bnnr% 
And ivith my hand at midnight held your bead ; 
And, like the watchful minutes to the bour, 
Still and anon cheer'd up the heavy time. 



If the midnight bell 
Did u-ith his inm tongue, and faraien nioatli« 
Sound on unto the drowsy race of mg^ j 
If ihis same were a churchyard where we itand. 
And thou pos5;essed Mrith a thousand wrongs ; 
Or if that surly spirit. Melancholy, 
Had bak'd thy bfood and made it beavyi-Chici^ 
Then, in dcspue of brooded watchful day, 
1 would into thy bosom pour my tboughts. 

Shaksfbasb. 

Meanwhile the persecuted Addine con- 
tinued to travel, with little interruption, all 
night. Her mind suffered such a tumuh of 
grief, regret, despair, and terror, that ibe 
could not be said to think. The Maronls's 
volet, who had placed himself in the (diaise 
with her, at first seemed inclined to talk ; bat 
her inattention soon silenced him, and left her 
to the indulgence of her own misery. 

They seemed to travel through obscure lanes 
and by-ways, along which the carriage drove 
as furiously as the darkness would permit. 
When the dawn appeared she perceived her- 
self on the borders of a forest, and renewed 
her entreaties to know whither she was going. 
The man replied " He had no wders to t^ 
but she would soon see." Adeline, who bod 
hitherto supposed they were carrying her to 
the villa, now began to doubt it ; andasevery 
place appeared less terrible to her imagination 
than that, her despair began to abate, and she 
thought only of the devoted Theodore, whom 
she knew to be the victim of maltoe ^^yt 
revenge. 

They now entered upon tlie forest, and it 
occurred to her that she was going to the 
abbey ; for though she had no remembrance 
of the scenery through which she passed, it 
was not the less probable that this was the 
lor^x oi ¥qxvXqxin\\\&, Y(bo^ boundaries were 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



89 



much too extensive to have come within 
fhe circle of her former walks. This conjec- 
ture revived a terror little inferior to that 
occasioned by the idea of going to the villa, 
for at the abb^ she would be equally in the 
power 'oi the Marquis, and also in that of her 
enemy La Motte. Her mind revolted at the 
picture her fancy drew, and as the carriage 
moved under the shades, she threw from the 
window a look of eager inquiry for some 
object which might confirm or destroy her 
present surmise. She did not long look before 
an opening in the forest showed her the distiint 
towers of me abbey. " I am indeed lost then ! ' ' 
said she, bursting into tears. 

They were soon at the foot of the lawn,' 
and Peter was seen running to open the gate 
at which the carriage stopped. When he 
saw Adeline he looked surprised and made an 
effort to speak ; but the chaise now drove up 
to the abbey, where, at the door of the hall, 
La Motte himself appeared. As be advanced 
to take her from the carriage a universal 
trembling seized her ; it was with the utmost 
difficulty she supported herself, and for some 
moments she neither observed his countenance 
nor heard his voice. He offered his arm to 
as^st \ssx into the abbey, which she at first 
refused, but having tottered a few paces was 
obliged to accept. They then entered the 
vaulted room, where, sinking into a chair, a 
flood oi tears came to her relief. La Motte 
did not interrupt the silence, which continued 
for some time, but paced the room in seeming 
agitation. When Adeline was sufficiently 
recovered to notice external objects, she ob- 
served his countenance, and there read the 
tumult of his soul, while he was struggling to 
assume a firmness which his better feelings 
opposed. 

La Motte now took her hand and would 
have led her from the room, but she stopped, 
and with a kind of desperate courage made an 
effort to engage him to pity and to save her. 
He interrupted her : " It is not in my power," 
said he, in a voice of emotion ; " I am not 
master of myself or my conduct ; inquire no 
further — it is sufficient for you to know that 
I pity you ; more I cannot do." He gave her 
no time to reply, but taking her hand led her 
to the stairs of the tower, and from thence 
to the chamber she had formerly occupied. 

"Here you must remain for the present," 
said he, " in a confinement which is, perhaps, 
almost as involuntary on my part as it can be 
on yours. I am willing to render it as easy 
as possible, and have therefore ordered some 
books to be brought you." 

Adeline made an effort to speak, but he 
hurried from the room, seemingly ashamed of 
the part he had undertaken, and unwilling to 
trust himself with her tears. She heard the 
door of the chamber locked, and then, looking 
towards the windows, perceived they were 
secured ; the door that led to the other apart- 



ments was also fastened. Sucli preparation 
for security shocked her, and hoi^eless as she 
had long believed herself, she now perceived 
her mind sink deeper in despiir. When the 
tcnrs she shed had somewhat relieved her, and 
her thoughts could turn from the subject of 
her inmiediate concern, she was thankful for 
the total seclusion allotted her, since it would 
spare her the pain she must feel in the pre- 
sence of Monsieur and MacLimc \j\ Mcute, 
and allow the unrestrained indulgence of lier 
own sorrow and reflection — reflection wliich, 
however distressing, was preferable to the 
agony inflicted on the mind when, agitated 
by care and fear, it is obliged to assume an 
appearance of tranquillity. 

In about a quarter of an hour her chamber 
door was unlocked, and Annette appeared 
with refreshments and books ; she expressed 
satisfaction at seeing Adeline again, but 
seemed fearful of speaking, knowing, pro- 
bably, that it was contrary to the orders of 
La Motte, who, she said, was waiting at the 
bottom of the stairs. When Annette was 
gone, Adeline took some refreshment, which 
was indeed necessary, for she had tasted 
nothing since she had left the inn. She was 
l^leased, but not surprised, that Madame La 
Motte did not appi^r, who, it was evident, 
shunned her from a consciousness of her own 
ungenerous conduct — a consciousness which 
offered some presumption that she was not 
wholly unfriendly to her. She reflected upon 
the words of \ja. Motte, ' ' I am not master of 
myself, or of my conduct," and though they 
afforded her no hope, she derived some com- 
fort, poor as it was, from the belief that he 
pitied her. After some time spent in miser- 
able reflection and various conjectures, her 
long-agitated spirits seemed to demand re- 
pose, and she laid down to sleep. 

Adeline slept quietly for several hours, and 
awoke with a mind refreshed and tranquillised. 
To prolong this temporary peace, and to pre- 
vent, therefore, the intrusion of her ONvn 
thoughts, she examined the books La Motte 
had sent her ; among these she found some 
that, in happier times, had elevated her mind 
and interested her heart ; their effect was now 
weakened, they were still, however, able to 
soften for a time the sense of her misfortunes. 

But this Lethean medicine to such a mind 
was but of temporary effect ; the entrance of 
La Motte dissolved the illusions of the page, 
and awakened her to a sense of her situation. 
He came with food, and having placed it on 
the table, left the room without speaking. 
Again she endeavoured to read, but his 
appearance had broken the enchantment ; 
bitter reflections returned to her mind, and 
brought with it the image of Theodore — of 
Theodore lost to her for ever ! 

La Motte meanwhile experienced all the 
terrors that could be inflicted by a conscience 
not wholly hardened to gULiU. V\.^\:»ssjii\i^'i\x 



90 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

led on by passion to dissipation, and from occurred to her that whatever scheme was in 

dissipation to vice ; but having once touched agitation would then most probably be dis- 

thc borders of infamy, the progressive steps cussed, and anxiety for Adeline made her 

followed each other fast, and he now saw stoop to a meanness which, in other cir- 

himsclf the pander of a villain, and the cumstances, would have been despicable. She 

betrayer of an innocent girl, whom every plea quitted her room, and, concealing herself in 

of justice and humanity called upon him to an apartment adjoining that in which she had 

protect. He contemplated his picture— he left the Marquis and her husband, listened 

shrank from it, but he could change its to their discourse. It turned upon the 

deformity only by an effort too nobly daring subject she had expected, and disdosed to 

for a man already effeminated by habitu^ her the full extent of their designs. Tenifi«i 

indulgence. He viewed the dangerous laby- for Adeline, and shocked at the guilty 

rinth into which he was led, and perceived, as weakness of La Motte, she was for some time 

if for the first time, the progression of his incapable of thinking, or determining how to 

guilt ; from this labyrinth he weakly ima- proceed. She knew her husband to be under 

gined further guilt could alone extricate him. great obligations to the Marquis, whose 

Instead of employing his mind upon the territory thus afforded him a shelter from the 

means of saving Adeline from destruction, world, and that it was in the power of the 

and himself from being instrumental to it, he former to betray him into the hands of his 

endeavoured only to lull the pangs of con- enemies. She believed also that the Marquis 

science, and to persuade himself into a belief would do this if provoked, yet she thought, 

that he must proceed in the course he had upon such an occasion, La Motte nd^tnnd 

begun. He knew himself to be in the power some way of appeasing the Marquis, without 

of the Marquis, and he dreaded that power subjecting himself to dishonour. After some 

more than the sure, though distant, punish- further reflection, her mind became mwe 

nient that waits upon guilt. The honour of composed, and she returned to the chamber. 

Adeline, and quiet of his own conscience, he where I^ Motte soon followed. Her spirits, 

consented to barter for a few years of exist- however, were not then in a state to encounter 

ence. either his displeasure or his opposition, which 

He was ignorant of the present illness of she had too much reason to expect whatever 

the Marquis, or he would have perceived sheshouldmention the subject of her ooncera, 

that there was a chance of escaping the and she, therefore, resolved not to notice it 

threatened punishment at a priceless enormous till the morrow. 

than infamy, and would, perhaps, have en- On the morrow she told La Motte all he 

deavoured to save Adeline and himself by uttered in his dreams, and mentioned other 

flight. But the Marquis, foreseeing the circumstances which convinced him it was in 

possibility of this, had ordered his servants vain any longer to deny the truth of her ap- 

carefuUy to conceal the circumstance which prehensions. She then represented to him 

detained him, and to acquaint La Motte that how possible it was to avoid the infamy into 

he should be at the abbey in a few days, at which he was about to plunge, by quitting 

the same time directing his valet to await him the territories of the Marquis ; and pleaded so 

there. Adeline, as he expected, had neither warmly for Adeline that La Motte. in sullen 




_ . „ „ — having 

from lurther guilt, and Adeline from misery, served from the Marquis a severe punishment, 

Most unwillingly had La Motte acquainted and knew that if he exasperated him by lefns^ 

his wife with the action which had made him ing to acquiesce with his wishes, he had little 

absolutely dependent on the will of the to expect from flight, for the eye of justice 

Marquis, but the perturbation of his mind and revenge would pursue him with inde- 

partly betrayed him ; frequently in his sleep fatigalile research. 

he muttered incoherent sentences, and fre- La Motte meditated how to break this to 

quently would start from slumber, and call, his wife ; for he perceived that there was no 

in passionate language, upon Adeline. These other method of counteracting her virtuous 

instances of a disturbed mind had alarmed compassion for Adeline, and the dangerous 

and terrified Madame La Motte, who watched consequences to be expected from it, than by 

while he slept, and soon gathered from his opposing it with terror for his safety,' and this 

words a confused idea of the Marquis's could bo done only by showing her the extent 

designs. of the evils that must attend the revenge of 

She hinted her suspicions to La Motte, who the Marquis. Vice had not yet so enSrdy 

reproved her for having entertained them ; darkened his conscience but that the blush of 

but his manner, instead of repressing, in- shame stained his cheek, and his tongue 

creased her fears for Adeline ; fears which the faltered, when he would have told his guilt, 

conduct of the Marquis soon confirmed. On At length, finding it impossible to mention 

the night that he slept at the abbey, it had pan\c\i\ais, Vi^ \old lier that, on account of 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 91 

an affair which no entreaties should ever A deep consciousness of the unworthy ncu- 

induce him to explain, his life was in the trality she had observed in Adeline's concerns 

power of the Marquis. " You see the nltema- made Madame La Motte anxiously avoid 

tive," said he; "take your choice of evils, seeing her, now that she was again in the 

and, if you can, tell Adeline of her danger, abbey. Adeline understood this conduct, 

and sacrifice my life to save her from a situa- and rejoiced that she was spared the anguish 

tion which many would be ambitious to ob- of meeting her as an enemy whom she had 

tain." once loved as a friend. Several days now 

Madame La Motte, condemned to the passed in solitude, in miserable rctrusi>i;ction 
horrible alternative of permitting the seduc- and dreadful expectation. The perilous situa- 
tion of innocence or of dooming her husband tion of Theodore was almost the constant 
to destruction, suffered a distraction of subject of her thoughts. Often did she 
thought which defied all control. Perceiv- breathe an anxious wish for his safety, and 
ing, however, that an opposition to the look round the sphere of possibility in search 
designs of the Marquis would ruin La Motte, of hope. But hope had almost left the hori- 
and aval' Adeline little, she determined to zon of her prosixict ; and when it did ajjixiar, 
yield and endure in silence. it hovered only over the death of the Marquis, 

At the tihie when Adeline was planning her whose vengeance threatened most certain de- 
escape from the abbey, the sigmficant looks struction. 

of I^ter had led La Motte to suspect the The Marquis, meanwhile, lay at the inn at 
truth, and to watch them more closely. He Baux, in a state of very doubtful recovery, 
had seen them separate in the hall in apparent The physician and surgeon, neither of whom 
confusion, and had afterwards observed them he would dismiss, nor suffer to leave the 
conversing together in the cloisters. Circum- village, proceeded upon contrary principles, 
stances so unusual left him not a doubt that and the good effect of what one prescriljcd 
Adeline had discovered her danger, and was was frequently counteracted l)y the injudicious 
conoerting with Peter some means of escape, treatment of the other. Humanity alone pre- 
AfTecting, therefore, to be informed of the vailed on the physician to continue his attend- 
v^hole affair, he charged Peter with treachery ance. The malady of the Marquis was also 
towards himself, and threatened him with the heightened by the impatience of his temper, 
veng^eance of the Marquis if he did not dis- the terrors of death, and the irritation of his 
close all he knew. The menace intimidated passions. One moment he Ijclieved himself 
Peter, and, supposing that all chance of dying, another he could scarcely bo i)rcvented 
assisting Adeline was gone, he made a de- from attempting to follow Adeline to the 
tailed confession, and promised not to ac- abbey. So various were the flucliuiiions of his 
quaint Adeline with the discovery of the mind, and so rapid the schemes that succeeded 
scheme. In this promise he was seconded each other, that his passions were in a con- 
by inclination ; for he feared to meet the dis- tinual stale of conflict. The physician at- 
pleasure which Adeline, believing he had tempted to convince him that his recovery 
betrayed her, might express. greatly depended upon tranquillity, and to 

On the evening of the day on which Ade- prevail upon him to attemi)t, at least, some 

line's intended escape was discovered, the Mar- command of his feelings; but he was soon 

quis designed to come to the abbey, and it had silenced, in hopeless disgust, by the impatient 

been agreed that he should then take Ade- answers of the Marquis. 

line to nis villa. La Motte had immediately At length the scn'ant who had carried off 

perceived the advantage of permitting Adeline Adeline returned, and the Marquis, having 

to repair, in the belief of being undiscovered, ordered him into his chamber, asked so many 

to the tomb. It would prevent mucii dis- questions in a breath, that the man knew 

turbance and opposition, and spare himself not which to answer. He pulled a folded 

the pain he must feel in her presence, when paper from his pocket, which he said had 

she should know that he had betrayed her. been dropped in the chaise by Mademoiselle 

A servant of the Marquis might go at the Adeline, and as he thought his lordship would 

appointed hour to the tomb, and, wrapt in like to sec it, he had taken care of it. The 

the disguise of night, might take her quietly Marquis stretched forth his hand N\'ith eager- 

thence, in the character of Peter. Thus with- ness, and received a note addressed to 

out resistance she would be carried to the villa, Theodore. On perceiving the sui^erscription, 

nor discover her mistake till it was too late the agitation of jealous rage for a moment 

to prevent its consequence. overcame him, and .he held it in his hand 

A\Tien the Marquis did arrive, I^a Motte, unable to open it. 

who was not so far intoxicated by what he had He, however, broke the seal, and found it 

drank as to forget his prudence, told him of to be a note of inquiry, written by Adeline 

whathadhappenedand what lie had planned; to Theodore during his illness, and which, 

and the Marquis approving it, his sci'vant by some accident, she had been prevt^nted 

was made acquainted with the signal which from sending him. The solicitude v^ ^^- 

bctrayed Adelmc to his povrer. pressed for Vvi^ T(iw\«^ ?\>xi^^ \Jwi ^q>3^ q\ >5cv^ 



92 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



Marquis, and drew from him a comparison 
of her feelings on the ilhiess of his rival and 
that of himself. "She could be solicitous for 
his recovery," said he, "but not for mine — 
she only dreads it." As if willing to prolong 
the pain this little billet had excited, he then 
read it again. Again he cursed his fate, and 
execrated his rival, giving himself up, as 
usuiil, to the transports of his passion. He 
was going to throw it from him, when his 
eyes caught the seal, and he looked earnestly 
at it. His anger seemed now to have sub- 
sided ; he deposited the note carefully in his 
pocket-book, and was, for some time, lost in 
thought. 

After many days of hopes and fears, the 
strength of his constitution overcame his 
illness, and he was well enough to write 
several letters, one of which he immediately 
sent off to prepare La Motte for his re- 
ception. The same jjolicy which had 
prompted him to conceal his illness from La 
Motte now urged him to say, what he knew 
would not happen, that he should reach the 
abbey on the day after his sen'ant. He re- 
peated his injunction that Adeline should be 
strictly guarded, and renewed his promises 
of reward for the future services of La 
Motte. 

La Motte, to whom each succeeding day 
had brought a new surprise and peqjlexity 
concerning the absence of the Marquis, re- 
ceived this notice with uneasiness, for he had 
began to hope that the Marquis had altered 
his intentions concerning Adeline, being 
either engaged in some new adventiure, or 
obliged to visit his estates in some distant 
province ; he would have been willing thus 
to have got rid of an affair which was to 
reflect so much dishonour on himself. 

This hope now vanished, and he directed 
Madame to prepare for the reception of the 
Marquis. Adeline passed these days in a 
state of suspense, which was now cheered by 
hope, and now darkened by despair. This 
delay, so much beyond her expectation, 
seemed to prove that the illness of the 
Marquis was dangerous ; and when she 
looked forward to the consequences of his 
recovery, she could not be sorry that it was 
so. So odious was the idea of him to her 
mind, that she would not suffer her lips to 
utter his name, * nor make the inquiry of 
Annette which was of such consequence to 
her peace. 

It was about a week after tlie receipt of 
' the Marquis's letter, that Adeline one day 
saw from her window a party of horsemen 
enter che avenue, and knew them to be the 
Marquis and his attendants. She retired 
from the window in a state of mind not to 
be described, and, sinking in a cliair, was 
for some time scarcely conscious of the 
objects around her. When she had re- 
covercd from the first terror which lus ap- 



pearance excited, she again tottered to the 
window : the party was not in sight, but she 
heard the trampmg of horses, and knew 
that the Marquis Imd wound round to the 
great gate of the abbey. She addressed 
herself to heaven for support and protection, 
and, her mind being now somewhat com- 
posed, sat down to wait the event. 

La Motte received the Marquis with ex- 
pressions of surprise at his long absence, and 
the latter, merely saying he had been de- 
tained by illness, proceeded to inquire for 
Adeline. He was told she was in her 
chamber, from whence she might be sum- 
moned if he wished to see her. The Marquis 
hesitated, and at length excused himsdf, 
but desired she might be strictly watdied. 

"Perhaps, my lord," said La Motte, 
smiling. "Adeline's obstinacy has been too 
powerful for your passion ; you seem less 
interested concerning her than fonnerly." 

"Oh, by no means ! " replied the Marquis ; 
"she interests me, if possible, more than 
ever ; so much, indeed, that I cannot have 
her too closely guarded ; and I therefore b^, 
I^ Motte, that you will suffer nobody to attoid 
her but when you can observe them yourself. 
Is the room where she is conhned siiffidenUy 
secure?" 

La Motte assured him it was ; but at the 
same time expressed his wish that she was 
removed to the villa. "If by any means," 
said he, ' ' she should contrive to escape. I 
know what I must expect from your dis- 
pleasure ; and this reflection keeps my nund 
in continual anxiety." 

"This removal cannot be at present," said 
the Marquis ; " she is safer here, and you do 
wrong to disturb yourself with any apprehen- 
sion of her escape, if her chamber is really so 
secure as you represent it." 

' ' I can have no motive for deceiving you, 
my lord, on this point." 

" I do not suspect you of any," said the 
Marquis ; ' * guard her carefully, and trust me 
she will not escape. I can rely upon my valet, 
and if you wish it he shall remain here." 

La Motte thought there could be no occa- 
sion for him, and it was agreed that the man 
should go home. 

The Marquis, after remaining about haW- 
an-hour in conversation with La Motte, left 
tlie abbey, and Adeline saw him depart with 
a mixture of surprise and thankfulness that 
almost overcame her. She had waited in 
momentary expectation of, being summoned 
to appear, and had been endeavouring to arm 
herself with resolution to support his pre- 
sence. She had listened to every voice that 
sounded from below, and at every step that 
crossed the passage her heart had palpitated 
with dread lest it should be La Motte coming 
to lead her to the Marquis. This state of 
suffering had been prolonged almost beyond 
her power of enduring it when she heard voicet 



i^MR ROMAMCE OF THE FOREST. 



93 



tinder her i^dow, and rising, saw the Mar- 
quis ride away. After giving utterance to the 
joy and thankfulness that swelled her heart, 
she endeavoured to account for this circum- 
stance, which, considering what had passed, 
was certainly very strange. It appeared, in- 
deed, wholly inexplicable, and after much 
fruitless inquiry she quitted the subject, 
endeavouring to persuade herself that it could 
portend only good. 

The time of La Motto's usual visitation 
now drew near, and Adeline expected it in the 
trembling hope of hearing that the Marquis 
had ceased his persecution ; but he was, as 
usual, sullen and silent, and it was not till he 
was about to quit the room that Adeline had 
the courage to inquire when the Marquis was 
expected again. La Motto, opening the 
door to depart, replied, "On the following 
day," and Adeline, whom fear and delicacy 
embarrassed, saw she could obtain no intelli- 
gence of Theodore but by a direct question. 
She looked earnestly, as if she would have 
spoken, and La Motto stopped, but she 
blushed and was still silent, till upon his again 
attempting to leave the room she faintly called 
him back. 

•* I would ask," said she, "after that un- 
fortunate chevalier who has incurred the 
resentment of the Marquis by endeavouring 
to serve me. Has the Marquis mentioned 
him?" 

*• He has," replied La Motto ; " and your 
indifference towards the Marquis is now fully 
explained." 

"Since. I must feel resentment towards 
those who injure me," said Adeline, " I may 
surely be allowed to be grateful to those who 
serve me ! Had the Marquis deserved my 
esteem he would probably have possessed it." 

•• Well, well," said La Motto ; " this young 
hero, this Theodore, who, it seems, has been 
brave enough to lift his arm against his 
colonel, is taken care of, and, I doul)t not, 
•will soon be sensible of the value of his 
quixotism.** 

Indignation, grief, and fear struggled in the 
bosom of Adeline ; she disdained to give I-ra 
Motte an opportunity of again profaning the 
name of Theodore ; yet the uncertainty under 
which she laboured urged her to inquire 
whether the Marquis had hoard of him since 
he left Baux. 

"Yes," said La Motte, " We has been safely 
carried to his regiment, where he is confined 
till the Marquis can attend to appear against 
him." 

Adeline had neither power nor inclination to 
inquire further, and La Motte quilting the 
chamber, she was left to the misery he had 
renewed. Though this information contained 
no new circumstance of misfortune (for she 
now heard confirmed what she had always ex- 
pected), a weight of new sorrow seemed to fall 
upon her heart, and she perceived that she 



had unconsciously cherished a latent hope of 
Theodore's escape l)eforc he reached the place 
of his destination. All hope was now, how- 
ever, gone ; he was suffering the miseries of a 
prison, and the tortures of apprehension Ixjth 
for his ouTi life and her safety. She pictured 
to herself the dark damp dungeon where he 
lay loaded with chains, and pale with sickness 
and grief; she heard him, in a voict? that 
thrilled her heart, call upon her name, and 
raise his eyes to heaven in silent supplication ; 
she saw the anguish of his countenance, the 
tears that fell slowly on his cheek, and re- 
membering, at the same time, the generous 
concUict that had brought him to this abyss 
of misery, and that it was for her sake he 
suffered, grief resolved itself into despair, her 
tears ceased lo flow, and she sank silently into 
a state of dreadful torpor. 

On the morrow the Marquis arrived and 
departed as before. Several days then elapsed 
and ho did not appear, till one evening, as 
La Motte and his wife were in their usual 
sitting-room, he entered, and conversed for 
some time upon general subjects, from which, 
however, he by degrees fell into a reverie, and 
after a pause of silence, ho rose and drew La 
Motte to the window. 

" I would speak with you alone," said he, 
" if you are at leisure ; if not, some other 
time will do." 

La Motto, assuring him he was perfectly so, 
would have conducted him to another room ; 
but the Marquis proposed a walk in the forest. 
They wont out together, and when they had 
reached a solitary glade, where the spreading 
branches of the beech and oak deepened the 
shades of twilight, and threw a solemn ob- 
scurity around, the Marquis turned to La 
Motte and addressed him. 

"Your condition. La Motte, is unhappy. 
This abbey is a melancholy residence for a 
man like you, fond of society, and like you 
also qualified to adorn it." 

La Motto bowed. • 

" I wish it was in my power to restore you 
to the world," continued the Marquis ; " per- 
haps, if I knew the particulars of the affair 
which has driven you from it, I might per- 
ceive that my interest could effectually serve 
you. I think I have heard you hint it was an 
affair of honour." 

La Motte was silent. 

" I mean not to distress you, however, nor 
is it common curiosity that prompts this 
inquiry, but a sincere desire to befriend you. 
You have already informed mo of some par- 
ticulars of your misfortunes. I think the 
liberality of your temper led you into expenses 
which you afterwards endeavoured to retrieve 
by gaming." 

"Yes, my lord," said La Motte ; " 'tis true 
that I dissipated the greater part of an affluent 
fortune in luxurious indulgences, and that I 
afterwards took unwoUh-'^ tosax^ \.q \s«c>f;«i,\ 



94 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

it ; but I wish to be spared upon tliis subject but wras at length convinced tliey wef6 

1 would, if possible, lose the remembrance of just. 

a transaction which must for ever stain my ' ' When the game was ended I callea one 

character, and the rigorous effect of which, I of my adversaries out of the room, and telling 

fear, it is not in your power, my lord, to him what I had observed, threatened instantly 

soften." to expose him if he did not restore my pro- 

" You may be mistaken on this point," perty. The man was for sontie time as 

replied the Marquis; "my interest at court positive as myself ; and, assuming the bravo, 

is by no means inconsiderable. Fear not threatened me with chastisement tor my scan- 

from me any severity of censure ; I am not at dalous assertions. I was not, however, in 

all inclined to judge harshly of the faults of a state of mind to be frightened, and his 

others. I well know how to allow for the manner served only to exasperate my temper, 

emergency of circumstances, and I think, La already sufficiently inflamed by misfortune. 

Motte, you have hitherto found mc your After retorting his threats, I was about to 

friend." return to the apartment we had left, and ex- 

' ' I have, my lord. " pose what had passed, when, with an insidious 

"And when you recollect that I have for- smile and a softened voice, he begged I 

given a certain transaction of late date " would favour him with a few moments atten- 

" It is true, my lord, and allow me to say I tion, and allow him to speak >nth the gentle- 
have a just sense of your generosity. The man his partner. To the latter part of his 
transaction you allude to is by far the worst request I hesitated, but, in the meantime the 
of my life, and what I have to relate cannot, gentleman himself entered the room. His 
therefore, lower me in your opinion. When partner related to him, in a few words, what 
1 had dissipated the greater part of my pro- had passed between us, and the terror that 
perty in habits of voluptuous pleasure, I had appeared in his countenance sufficiently de- 
recourse to gaming to supply the means of clared his consciousness of guilt, 
continuing them. A run of good luck for "They then drew aside, and remained a 
some time enabled me to do this, and en- few minutes in conversation together, after 
couraging my most sanguine expectations, I which they approached me with an offer, as 
continued in the same career of success. Soon they phrased it, of a compromise. I declared, 
after this a sudden turn of fortune destroyed however, against anything of this kind, and 
my hopes, and reduced me to the most dcs- swore nothing less than the whote sum I bad 
perate extremity. In one night my money lost should content me. • Is it not possible, 
was lowered to the sum of two hundred louis. monsieur, that you may be offered something 
These I resolved to stake also, and with them as advantageous as the whole ?' I did not 
my life, for it was my resolution not to sur\'ive understand their meaning ; but after they had 
their loss. Never shall I forget the horrors continued for some time to give distant hints 
of that moment on which hung my fate, nor of the same sort, they proceeded to explain, 
the deadly anguish that seized my heart when ' ' Perceiving their characters to be wholly 
my last stake was gone. I stood for some in my power, they wished to secure my inte- 
time in a state of stupefaction, till, roused to rest to their party, and therefore infcnming 
a sense of misfortune, my passion made mc me that they belonged to an association ot 
pour forth execrations on my more fortunate persons who lived upon the folly and incx- 
rivals, and act all the frenzy of despair, perience of others, they offered me a share in 
During this paroxysm of madness, a gentle- their concern. My fortunes were desperate, 
man, who had been a silein obsen-cr of all and the proposal now made me would not 
that passed, approached mc. * You are un- only produce an immediate supply, but enable 
fortunate sir," said he. ' I need not be nie to return to those scenes of dissipated 
infotmed of that, sir,' I replied. 'You have, pleasure to which passion had at first, and 
perhaps, been ill itsed,' resumed he. *Yes, long habit afterwards, attached me. I closed 
sir, 1 am ruined, and therefore it may be with the offer, and thus sank from dissipation 
said, I am iV-used.' ' Do you know the into infamy." 

people you have played with ? ' ' No ; but I La Motte paused as if the recollection of 
have met them in the first circles.' 'Then those times filled him with remorse, 'fhe 
I am probably mistaken,' .said he, and walked Marquis understood his feelings. 
away. His last words roused me, and raised "You judge too rigorously of yoursdf," 
a hope that my money had not been fairly said he; "there are few persons, let their 
lost. Wishing for further information, I appearance of honesty be what it may, who, 
went in .search of the gentleman, but he had in such circumstances, would have acted 
left the room. I, however, stifled my tran- better than you have done. Had I been in 
sports, returned to the table where I had lost your situation I know not how I might have 
my money, placed myself behind the chair of acted. That rigid virtue which shall con- 
one of the persons who had won it, and demn you may dignify itself with the appel- 
closely watched the game. For some time I lation of wisdom, but I wish not to possess 
saw nothing that could confirm my suspicions, it ; let it still reside where it generally is to be 



THE ROMANCE OP THE FOREST. 95 

found, in the cold bosoms of those who, happiness ; certain set notions, acquired in 
wanting feeling to be men, dignify them- infancy, and cherished invohmtarily by age, 
selves with the title of philosophers. But which grow up and cissume a gloss so plausih1<: 
pray proceed." that few minds, in what is called a civilised 

" Our success was for some time unlimited, country, can afterwards overcome them, 
for we held the wheel of fortune, and trusted Tnith is often perverted by education. While 
not to her caprice. Thoughtless and volup- the refined Europeans boast a standard of 
tuous by nature, my expenses fully kept pace honour .ind a sublimity of virtue which often 
with my mcome. An unlucky discovery of leads them from pleasure to misery, and from 
the practices of our party was at length made nature to error, the simple, uninformed 
by a young nobleman, which obliged us to act American follows the impulse of his heart, 
for some time with the utmost circumspection, and obeys the inspiration of wisdom." 
It would be tedious to relate the particulars The Marquis paused, and La Mottc con- 
whidi made us at length so suspected, that tinned to listen in eager expectation, 
the distant civility and cold reser\'e of our "Nature, uncontaminated by false refine- 
acquaintance rendered the frequenting public ment," resumed the Marquis, "everywhere 
assemblies both painful and unprofitable. We acts alike in the great occurrences of life, 
turned our thoughts to other modes of obtain- Tlie Indian discovers his friend to be per- 
mg money, and a swindling transaction, in fidious, and he kills him ; the wild Asiatic 
which I engaged to a very large amount, soon docs the same ; the Turk, when ambition 
compelled me to leave Paris. You know the fires, or revenge provokes, gi*atifies his piis- 
rest, my lord." sion at tii'^ rxpense of life, and does not call 

La Motte was now silent, and the Marquis it murder. ICvrn the polished Italian, directed 
continued for some time musing. by jealousy, or tempted by a strong circum^ 

"You perceive, my lord," at length re- stance of advantage, draws his stiletto and 
sumed La Motte, " you perceive that my case accomplishes his purijose. It is the first 
is h(n>eless." proof of a superior mind to liberate itself 

"It is bad, indeed, but not entirely hope- from prejudices of country or of education. 
less. From my soul I pity you ; yet if you You are silent, La Motte ; are you not of my 
should return to the world, and incur the opinion?" 

danger of prosecution, I think my interest "I am attending, my lord, \o yoyyx reason" 
with the minister might save you from any ing" 

severe punishment. You seem, however, to "There are, I repeat it," said the Marquis, 
have lost all relish for society, and perhaps do " people of minds so weak as to shrink from 
not wish to retiu*n to it. " acts they have leia accustomed to hold 

" Oh I my lord, can you doubt this? But wrong, however advrantageous. They never 
I am overcome with the excess of your good- suffer themselves to be guided by circum- 
ness ; would to Heaven it were in my power stances, but fix for life upon a certain stan- 
to prove the gratitude it inspires ! " dard, from which they will on no account 

"Talk not of goodness," said the Marquis ; depart. Self-preservation is the great law of 
* * I will not pretend that my desire of serving nature ; when a reptile hurts us, or an animal 
you is unsdloyed by any degree of self- of prey threatens us, we think no further, but 
interest. I will not affect to be more than endeavour to annihilate it. When my life, or 
man, and trust me those who do are less. It what may be essential to my life, requires the 
is in your power to testify your gratitude, and sacrifice of another, or even if some passion, 
"bindme to your interest for ever." wholly unconquerable, requires it, I should 

He paused. be a madman to hesitate. La Motte, I 

" Name but the means," cried La Motte, think I may confide in you—there are ways 
•* name but the means, and if they are within of doing certain things — you understand me. 
the compass of possibility they shall be exe- There are times, and circumstances, and op- 
cuted." portunities — you comprehend my meaning.' 

The Marquis was still silent. " Explain yourself, my lord." 

" Do you doubt my sincerity, my lord, that " Kind services that in short, there are 

you are yet silent ? Do you fear to repose a services which excite all our gratitude, and 
confidence in the man whom you have already which we can never think repaid. It is in 
loaded with obligations, who lives by your your power to place me in such a situation." 
mercy, and almost by your means?" " Indeed, my lord ! name the means." 

The Marquis looked earnestly at him, but " I have already named them. This abbey 
did not speak. well suits the purpose ; it is shut up from the 

"I have not deserved this of you, my eye of observation; any transaction may be 
lord ; speak, I entreat you." concealed within its walls ; the hour of mid' 

• ' There are certain prejudices attached to niglit may witness the deed, and the morning 
the human mind," said the Marquis, in a slow shall not dawn to disclose it ; these woods 
and solemn voice, • ' which it requires all our tell no tales. Ah, La Motte ! am I right in 
wisdom to keep from interfering with our trusting this business with ^ovi^ ^V^:^ \ 



96 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



believe you are desirous of serving me, and 
of preservinjj yourself?" 

The Marcjuis i^aused und looked steadfastly 
nt La Mottc, whose counteminee was almost 
concealed by the gloom of evening. 

"My lord, you may trust me in anything ; 
explain yourself more fully." 

* • What security will vou give me for your 
faithfulness?" 

"My life, my lord; is it not already in 
your power?" 

The Mar(|uis hesitated, and then said : 

" To-morrow, aboiU this time, I shall return 
to the abl)cv, and will then explain my mean- 
ing, if, indeed, vou shall not already have 
un«li'r«>tood it. Vou, in the meantime, will 
eju-jider your own powers of resolution, and 
be prepared either to adopt the purpose I 
shall suggest, or to declare you will not." 

I«i Molle made some confused reply. 

"Farewell till to-morrow," said the Mar- 
quis ; " remember that freedom and aflluence 
are now bnAire you." 

He movi^d low.irds the a!)bcy, and, mount- 
ing his horse, rode off with his attendants. 
La Motlii walked slowly home, musing on 
the late conversation. 



c:hapter XIV. 

Danger, wh«)se iiinl)-. of j;i,int inoultl 
Wliiii niort.ll eye can fixM l)ehol(l? 
Who stalks his round, in hideous form ! 
UowlinfT amuht the midnight storm ! 
.\nd with him thousand phantoms join'd, 
/r//o hrotn^t to deeds accursed, the mind^ 
On whom that raving brood of Fate, 
Who Ian the blood of Sorrow, wait ; 
Who, hear ! this ghastly main can see, 
And look not madly wild like thee ! 

Collins. 

Till': Marquis \i'as punctual to the hour. La 
Molte received him at the gate, but he de- 
clined entering, and said he preferred a walk 
in the forest. Thither, therefore. La Motte 
attended him. After some general conver- 
sation : 

"Well," said the Marquis, "have you 
considered what I said, and are you prepared 
to decide?" 

" I have, my lord, and will quickly decide 
when you shall further explain yourself. Till 
then I can form no resolution." 

The Marquis appeared dissatisfied, and 
was a moment silent. 

" Is it then possible," ho at length resumed, 
"that you do not understand? This igno- 
rance is surely affected. La Motte, I expect 
sincerity. Tell me, therefore, is it necessary 
I should say more? " 

"It is, my lord," .said La Motte imme- 
diately. '' If you fear to confide in me freely, 
now can I fully accomplish your purpose ? " 
M^^rn^'-'r,.} proceed farther," said the 
maTqins, "let me administer some oalh wYiich 



shall bind you to secrecy. But this is scarcely 
necessary ; for, could I even doubt your word 
of honour, the remembrance of a certain 
transaction would point out to you the ne- 
cessity of beinf as silent yourself as you must 
wish me to be. ' There was now a pause of 
silence, during which, both the Marquis and 
La Motte betrayed some confusion. "I 
think. La Motte," said he, "I have givmi 
you sufficient proof that I canbe gratelul; 
the sen-ices you have already rendered me 
with respect to Adeline have not been unre- 
warded. ' 

"Tme. my lord, I am ever willing to 
acknowledge this, and am sorry it has not 
been in my power to serve you more cAec- 
tually. Your further views respecting her lam 
ready to assist." 

" I thank you. Adeline '* the Marquis 

hesitated. 

".Adeline," rejoined La Motte, eager to 
anticipate his wishes, " has beauty worthy of 
your pursuit. She has inspired a passion, of 
which she ought to be proud, and, at any 
rate, she shall soon be yours. Her chamis 
are worthy of " 

"Yes, yes," interrupted the BCarquis; 
*' but ' he paused. 

' ' But they have given you too much trouble 
in the pursuit," sold I^i Motte ; "and to be 
sure, my lord, it nuist be confessed they have ; 
but this trouble is all over — yon may now con- 
sider her as your own." 

" I would do so," said the Marquis, fixing 
an eye of earnest regard upon La Motte ; "1 
would do so." 

" Name your hour, my lord ; you shaO 
not be interrupted. Beauty, such as Ade- 
line's " 

" Watch her closely," rejoined the MarqaiSi 
"and on no account sum:r her to leave ber 
apartment. Where is she now ? " 

"Confined in her chamber." 

" Ver>' well. But I am impatient" 

" Name vour time, my lord to-morrov 

night?" 

"To-morrow night," said the Marquis: 
" to-morrow night. Do you undentana me 
now?" 

" Yes, my lord, this night, if you wiih it 
so. Rut had you not Ixilter dismiss your 
servants, and remain yourself in the forest? 
You know the door that opens upon the 
woods from the west tower. Come thither 
about twelve — I will be there to conduct you 
to her chamber. Remember, then, my lord, 
that to-night " 

"Adeline dies ! " interrupted the Marquis, 
in a low voice, scarcely human. "Do you 
understand me now? " 

La Motte shnmk aghast. ' ' My lord I " 

"La Motte 1" said the Marquis. There 
was a silence of several minutes, in ^ich 
La Motte endeavoured to recox'er himselt 
** Xr^ Tcvft ^sV, xwj iQtd, the meaning of this," 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



97 



said he, when he had breath to speak. 
• ' Why should you wish the death of Adeline 
— of Adeline whom so lately you loved? " 

"Make no inquiries for my motive," said 
the Marquis ; " but it is as cerUiin as that I 
live that she you name must die. This is 
sufficient." 

The surprise of La Motte equalled his 
horror. 

" The means are various," resumed the 
Marc[uis. " I could have wished that no 
blood might be spilt ; and there are drugs 
sure and speedy in their effect, but they 
cannot be soon or safely procured. I also 
wish it ova: — ^it must be done quickly — this 
night." 

"This night, my lord?" 

"Aye, this night, La Motte ; if it is to be, 
why not soon? Have you no convenient 
dn^ at hand ? " 

"None, my lord." 

" 1 feared to trust a third person, or I 
should have been provided," said the Mar- 
quis. "As it is, take this poniard ; use it as 
occasion offers, but be resolute." 

La Motte received the poniard with a 
trembling hand, and continued to gaze upon 
it for some time, scarcely knowing what he 
did. 

"Put it up," said the Marquis, "and en- 
deavour to recollect yourself." 

La Motte obeyed, but continued to muse 
in silence. 

He saw himself entangled in the web 
which his own crimes had woven. Being in 
the power of the Marquis, he knew he must 
either consent to the commission of a deed 
from the enormity of which, depraved as he 
was, he shrank in horror, or sacrifice fortune, 
freedom, probably life itself, to the refusal. 
He had been led on by slow gradations from 
folly to vice, till he now saw before him an 
abyss of guilt which startled even the 
conscience that so long had slumbered. The 
means of retreating were desperate — to pro- 
ceed was eqaally so. 

"When he considered the innocence and the 
helplessness of Adeline, her orphan state, her 
former afiiectionate conduct, and her confi- 
dence in his protection, his heart melted with 
compassion for the distress he had already 
occasioned her, and shrank in terror from the 
deed he was lurged to commit. But when, 
on the other hand, he contemplated the 
destruction that threatened him from the 
vengeance of the Marquis, and then con- 
sidered the advantages that were offered him 
<rf favour, freedom, and probably fortune — 
terror and temptation contributed to over- 
come the pleadings of humanity, and silence 
the voice of conscience. In this state of 
tumultuous uncertainty he continued for some 
time silent, until the voice of the Marquis 
roused him to a conviction of the necessity of 
at least appearing to acquiesce in his designs. 



" Do you hesitate ? " said the Marquis. 

"No, my lord, my resolution is fixed — I 
will obey you. hut methinks it would Iks 
better to avoid bio<jihhefl. Strange seop-'ls 
have been rcvciilcd by " 

"Aye, but how avoid it?" interrupted th-: 
Marquis. " Poison I will not venture lo pro- 
cure. I have given you one sure instruin-.-nt 
of death. You also may find it dangerous i'* 
inquire for a drug." 

I/i Motte perceived that he could nf)t 
purchase poison without subjecting; himseU 
to very dangerous suspicion, and he imnuN 
diately replied, " You are right, my lord, aiul 
I will follow your orders implicitly." 

Tiie Marquis now proceeded, in broken 
sentences, to give further directions concern- 
ing this dreadful scheme. 

"In her sleep," said he, "at midnight; 
the family will then be at rest." 

Afterwards they planned a story, which 
was to account for her disappearance, and by 
which it was to seem that she had sought an 
escape in conse(iuence of her aversion to the 
addresses of the Maniuis. The doors of her 
chamber and of the west tower were to be 
left open to corroborate this account, and 
many other circumstances were to be con- 
trived to confirm tiie suspicion. They further 
consulted how the Marquis was to be in- 
formed of the event ; and it was agreed that 
he should come as usual to the abbey on the 
following day. " To-night, then" said the 
Marquis, "I may rely upon your resolu- 
tion ? " 

" You may, my lord." 

" Farewell, then. When we meet again — " 

"When we meet again," said La Motte, 
" it will be done." He followed the Marquis 
to the abbey, and having seen him mount his 
horse, and wished him a good night, he 
retired to his chamber, where he shut him- 
self up. 

Adeline, meanwhile, in the solitude of her 
prison, gave way to the despair which her 
condition inspired. She tried to arrange her 
thoughts, and to argue herself into some 
degree of resignation ; but reflection, by re- 
presenting the past, and reason, by antici- 
pating the future, brought before her mind 
the full picture of her misfortunes, and she 
sank in despondency. Of Theodore, who, 
by a conduct so noble, had testified his at- 
tachment and involved himself in ruin, slie 
thought with a degree of anguish infinitely 
superior to what she had felt upon any other 
occasion. 

That the very exertions which had deserved 
all her gratitude and awakened all her tender- 
ness should be the cause of his destruction 
was a circumstance so much beyond the or- 
dinary bounds of misery that her fortitude 
sank at once before it. Th6 idea of Theodore 
suffering — Theodore d^vcv" — ^?>s. Vat ^^^st 
present to her \ma^Ti3L\\o\i» ^.xA Vt^o^^'o!^ 



98 



THE ROMANCE OP THE FOREST, 



excluding the sense of her own danger, made 
her conscious only of his. Sometimes the 
hope he had given her of being able to vindi- 
cate his conduct, or at leiist to obtain a 
pardon, would return ; but it was like the 
faint beam of an April mom, transient and 
cheerless. She knew that the Marquis, stung 
with jealousy, and exasperated to revenge, 
would pursue him with unrelenting malice. 

Against such an enemy what could Theo- 
dore oppose ? Conscious rectitude would not 
avail him to ward off the blow which disap- 
pointed passion and powerful pride directed. 
Her distress was considerably heightened by 
reflecting that no intelligence of him could 
reach her at the abbey, and that she must 
remain she knew not how long in the most 
dreadful suspense concerning his fate. From 
the abbey she saw no possibility of escaping. 
She was a prisoner in a chamber enclosed at 
cvcrv avenue, she had no opportunity of con- 
versing with any person who could aiford her 
even a chance of relief, and she saw herself 
condemned to wait in passive silence the ira- 

E ending destiny — infinitely more dreadful to 
er imagination than death itself. 

Thus circumstanced, she yielded to the 
pressure of her misfortunes, and would sit for 
nours motionless and given up to thought. 
"Theodore I" she would frequently exclaim, 
"you cannot hear my voice, you cannot fly 
to help me — yourself a prisoner and in 
chains !" The picture was too horrid. The 
swelling anguish of her heart would subdue 
her utterance, tears bathed her cheeks, and 
she became insensible to ever>thing but the 
misery of Theodore. 

On this evening her mind had been re- 
markably tranquil ; and as she watched from 
her window, with a still and melancholy 
pleasure, the setting sun, the fading splen- 
dour of the western horizon, and the gradual 
approach of twilight, her thoughts bore her 
back to the time when, in happier circum- 
stances, she had viewed the same appear- 
ances. She recollected also the evening of 
her temporary escape from the abbey, when 
from this same window she had watched the 
declining sun, how anxiously she had awaited 
the fall of twilight, how much she had endea- 
voured to anticipate the events of her future 
life, with what trembling fear she had de- 
scended from the tower and ventured into the 
forest. These reflections produced others that 
filled her heart with anguish and her eyes with 
tears. 

While she was lost in her melancholy 
reverie she saw the Marquis mount his horse 
and depart from the gates. The sight of him 
revived, in all its force, a sense of the misery 
he inflicted on her beloved Theodore, and a 
consciousness of the evils which more imme- 
diately threatened herself. She withdrew 
from the window in an agony of tears, which 
continuing for a considerable time, her frame 



was at length quite exhausted, and she retired 
early to rest. 

La Motte remained in his chamber till 
supper obliged him to descend. At table his 
wild and haggard countenance^ which, in 
spite of all his endeavours, betnjred the dis- 
order of his mind, and his kmg taad frequent 
fits of abstracti(», surprised as irdl as alarEoed 
Madame La Motte. When Peter left the room 
she tenderly inquired what had distmbed him, 
and he with a distorted smile tried to be gay, 
but the effort was beyond his ait, and he 
quickly relapsed into silence ; when Madame 
La Motte spoke, and he strove to conceal the 
absence of his Uioughts, he answered so en- 
tirely from the purpose that his abstraction 
became still more apparent. Observing Uiis, 
Madame La Motte appeared to take no notice 
of his present temper, and they continued to 
sit in uninterrupted silence till the hour of 
rest, when they retired to their chamber. 

I^ Motte lay in a state of distwbed watch- 
fulness for some time, and his frequent starts 
awoke Madame, who, however, being pacified 
by some trifling excuse, soon went to sleep 
again. This agitation continued till near 
midnight, when, recollecting that tiw time 
was now passing in idle reflection wfaksh 
ought to be devoted to action, be stole 
silently from his bed, wrapped himself m his 
night-gown, and, taking the lamp which 
burned nightly in his chamber, passed up 
the spiral staircase. As he went he freijaently 
looked back, and often started and listened 
to the hollow sighings of the blast 

His hand shook so violently when he at- 
tempted to unlock the door of Addine's 
chamber that he was obliged to set the lamp 
on the ground and apply both his bands. 
The noise he made with the key induced hfas 
to suppose he must have awakened her ; hot 
when he opened the door, and perceived the 
stillness that reigned within, he was convinced 
she was asleep. When he approached the 
bed he heard her gently breathe and sooo 
after sigh, and he stopped, but, silence re- 
turning, he again advanced, and then heard 
her sing in her sleep. As he listened he dis- 
tinguished some notes of a melancholy Uttk 
air which, in her happier days, she had often 
sung to him. The low and mouroJ^ accent 
in which she now uttered them expressed too 
well the tone of her mind. 

La Motte now stepped hastily towards 
the bed, when, breathing a deep sigh, sIm was 
again silent. He undrew the curtain, and 
saw her lying in a profound sleep, her diedc 
yet wet with tears, resting upon her arm. He 
stood a moment looking at her ; and, as he 
viewed her innocent and lovely countenance, 
pale in grief, the light of the lamp, wbidi 
shone strong upon her eyes, awoke her, and 
perceiving a man she uttered a scream. Her 
recollection returning, she knew him to be 
Va MoUe, QiXidL '\\. vG&\axi>\^ TSRMRinf^ to her 



The romance of the forest. 



^ 



that the Marqnis was at hand, she raised her- 
self in bed and implored pity and protection. 
La Motte stood looking eagerly at her, but 
without replying. 

The wildness of his looks and the gloomy 
silence he preserved increased her alarm, and 
with tears of terror she renewed her suppli- 
cation. 

"You once saved me from destruction," 
cried she ; "oh save me now ! Have pity 
upon me — I have no protector but you." 

•• What is it you fear?" said La Motte, in 
a tone scarcely articulate. 

•' Oh save me — save me from the Marquis !" 
" Rise then," said he, " and dress yourself 
quickly ; I shall be back again in a few 
minutes." 

He lighted a candle that stood on the table 
and left the chamber. Adeline immediately 
arose and endeavoured to dress, but her 
thoughts were so bewildered that she scarcely 
knew what she did, and her whole frame was so 
violently asitated that it was with the utmost 
difficulty we preserved herself from fainting. 
She threw her clothes hastily on, and then 
sat down to await the return of La Motte. 
A considerable time elapsed, yet he did not 
appear, and having in vain endeavoured to 
compose her spirits, the pain of suspense at 
length became so insupportable, that she 
opened the door of her chamber, and went 
to the top of the staircase to listen. She 
thought she heard voices below ; but, con- 
sidenng that if the Marquis was there, her 
app«uance could only incrcfise her danger, 
she checked the step she had almost involun- 
tarily taken to descend. Still she listened, 
and still thought she distinguished voices. 
Soon after she heard a door shut, and then 
footsteps, and she hastened back to her 
cfaamber. 

Near a quarter of an hour elapsed and La 
Motte did not appear ; when again she thought 
she heard a murmur of voices below, and 
also pasang steps, and at length her anxiety 
not suffisring her to remain in her room, she 
moved through the passage that communi- 
cated with the spiral staircase ; but all was 
now still. In a few moments, however, a 
light flashed across the hall, and La Motte 
appeared at the door of the vaulted room. 
He looked up, and, seeing Adeline in the 
gallery, beckoned her to descend. 

She hesitated and looked towards her 
chamber ; but La Motte now approached 
the stairs, and, with faltering steps, she went 
to meet him. 

"I fear the Marquis may see me," said 
she, whispering ; " where is he ?" 

La Motte took her hand and led her on, 
assuring her she had nothing to fear from the 
Marquis. The wildness of his looks, how- 
ever, and the trembling of his hand, seemed 
to contradict this assurance, and she inquired 
whither he was leading her. 



" To the forest," .said T^-i Motte, '• that 
you may escape from the ablxiy ; a horse wails 
for you without. I can save you by no other 
m(»ans." 

New terror seized her. She could scarcely 
believe that Li Motte, who had hitherto con- 
spired with the Marquis, and had so closely 
confined her, should now himself undertake 
her escape, and she at this moment felt a 
dreadful presentiment which it\^'as impossible 
to account for, that he \%'as leading her out to 
murder her in the forest. Again shrinking 
back, she supplicaCcd his mercy. He assured 
her he meant only to protect her, and desired 
she would not waste time. 

There was something in his manner that 
spoke sincerity, and she suffered him to con- 
duct her to a side door that opened into the 
forest, where she could just distinguish 
through the gloom a man on horseback. 
This brought to her remembrance the night in 
which she had quitted the tomb, when, trust- 
ing to the person who appeared, she had been 
carried to the Marquis's villa. La Motte 
called, and was answered by Peter, whose 
voice somewhat reassured Adeline. 

He then told her that the Marquis would 
return to the abbey en the following morning, 
and that this could be her only opportunity 
of escaping his designs ,• that she might rely 
upon his (I^ Motte's) word, that Peter had 
orders to carry her wherever she chose ; but 
as he knew the Marquis would be indefa- 
tigable in search after her, he advised her by 
all means to leave the kingdom, which she 
might do with Peter, who was a native of 
Savoy, and would convey her to the house of 
his sister. There she might remain till La 
Motte himself, who did not now think it would 
be safe to continue much longer in France, 
should join her. He entreated her, whatever 
might happen, never to mention the events 
which had passed at the abbey. 

"To save you, Adeline, I have risked my 
life ; do not increase my danger and your 
own by any unnecessary discoveries- We 
may never meet again, but I hope you will be 
happy ; and remember, when you think of 
me, that I am not quite so bad as I have been 
tempted to be." 

Having said this he gave her Some money, 
which he told her would be necessary to defray 
the expenses of her journey. Adeline could 
no longer doubt his sincerity, and her trans- 
ports of joy and gratitude would scarcely 
permit her to thank him. She wished to have 
bid Madame La Motte farewell, and indeed 
earnestly requested it ; but he again told her 
she had no time to lose, and, having wrapped 
her in a large cloak, he lifted her on the horse. 
She bade him adieu with tears of gratitude, 
and Peter set off as fast as the darkness would 
pennit. 

When they were ^oX ^ot^r '^^'^^ *'^- ^"sv 
glad, with all my Vieail, losai^.TOs^'^" ^-aJA^v^^ 

^ 2. 



100 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

" to see you again. Who would have thought, She inquired further concerning the route 
after all. that my master himself \\rould have they were to take, and whether Peter was 
bid me take you away? Well, to be sure, sumciently acquainted with the road. "When 
strange things come to pass ; but I hope we once I get to Thiers, I know it well enough," 
shall have better luck this time." Adeline, not said Peter, "for I have gone it many a time 
choosing to reproach him with the treachery in my younger days, and anybody will tell us 
of which she feared he had been formerly the way there." They travelled fcM* several 
guilty, thanked him for his good wishes, and hours in darkness and silence, and it was not 
said she hoped they should be more fortunate ; till they ciperged fh}m the forest that Adeline 
but Peter, in his usual strain of eloquence, saw the morning light streak the eastern 
proceeded to undeceive her in this point, and clouds. The sight cheered and revived her ; 
to acquaint her with every circumstance which and as she travdled silently along, her nund 
his memory, and it was naturally a strong revolved the events of the past night, and 
one. could furnish. meditated plans for the future. The present 

Peter expressed such an artless interest in kindnessof La Motte appeared so very difierent 
her welfare, and such concern for her former from his former conduct, that it astonished 
disappointment, that she could no longer and perplexed her, and she could only account 
doubt his faithfulness ; and this conviction for it by attributinp^ it to one of those sudden 
not only strengthened her confidence in the impulses of humamty which sometimes operate 
present undertaking, but made her listen to even upon the most depraved hearts. 
his conversation with kindness and pleasure. But when she recollected his former words, 
" I should never have stayed at the abbey till " that he was not master of himsdf," she 
this time," said he, " if I could have got away ; could scarcely believe that mere pity should 
but my master frightened me about the Mar- induce him to break the bonds which had 
quis, and I had not enough money to carry hitherto so strongly held him ; and then, ccn- 
me into my own country, so that I was forced sidering the altered conduct of the Marquis, 
to stay. It's well we have got some solid she was inclined to think that she owed her 
louis-d'ors now ; for I question, ma'amselle, liberty to some change in his sentiments 
whether the people on the road would have towards her ; yet the advice La Motte ha^t 
taken those trinkets you formerly talked of given her to quit the kingdom, and the money 
for money." with which he had supplied her fiar that pur- 

" Possibly not, "said Adeline ; "lam thank- pose, seemed to contradict this opinion, and 
ful to Monsieur La Motte that we have more involved her again in doubt, 
certain means of procuring conveniences. Peter now got directions to Thiers, wUdi 
What route shall you take when we leave the place they reached without any aocidait, and 
forest, Peter ? " Peter mentioned very cor- there stopped to refresh themselves. As soon 
rectly a great part of the road to Lyons ; as Peter thought the horse sufficiently rested, 
"and then," said he, "we can easily get to they again set forward, and from the rich 
Savoy, and that will be nothing. My sister, plains of the Lyonnois, Addine, for the first 
God bless her ! I hope is Uving ; I have not time, caught a view of the distant Alps, whose 
seen her many a year, but if she is not, all the majestic heads, seeming to prop the vault of 
people will be glad to see me, and you will heaven, filled her mind with sublime cmo- 
easily get a lodging, ma'amselle, and every- tions. 

thingyou want. " In a few hours they reached the vale in 

Adeline resolved to go with him to Savoy, which stands the city of Lyons, whose beau- 
La Motte, who knew the character and de- tiful environs, studded with villas, and rich 
signs of the Marquis, had advised her to leave with cuhivation, withdrew AdeUne fiom the 
the kingdom, and had told her, what her fears mekmcholy contemplation of her own ciitnim- 
might have suggested, that the Marquis would stances and her more painful anxiety for 
be indefatigable in search of her. His motive Theodore. 

for this advice must be a desire of serving her ; When they reached that busy city, her first 
why else, when she was already in his power, care was to inquire concerning the passage <rf 
should he remove her to another place, and the Rhone ; but she forbore to n^ce these 
even furnish her with money for the expenses inquiries of the people of the inn, considering 
of a journey? that if the Marquis should follow her thither 

At Lelencourt, where Peter said he was they might enable him to pursue her route. 
well known, she would be most likely to meet She, therefore, sent Peter to the quairs to 
with protection and comfort, even should his hire a boat, while she herself took a slight 
sister be dead ; and its distance and solitary repast, it being her intention to embark im- 
^luation were circumstances that pleased her. mediately. Peter presently returned, having 
These reflections would have pointed out to engaged a boat and men to take them up the 
\^ ^ pnidence of proceeding to Savoy, had Rhone to the nearest part of Savoy, from 
shebeen less destitute of resources in France ; whence they were to proceed by land' to the 

in her present situation they proved it to be village of Lelencourt. 

necessary. H».\\tv^ Vake^R.^om-fex^TcsbsQent, she ordered 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



101 



him to conduct her to the vessel. A new and 
striking scene presented itself to Adeline, who 
looked with surprise upon the river, gay with 
vessels, and the quay crowded with busy faces, 
and felt the contrast which the cheerful ob- 
jects around bore to herself— to her an orphan, 
desolate, helpless, and flying from persecution 
and her country. She spoke with the master 
of the boat, and having sent Peter back to 
the inn for the horse (La Motle's gift to Peter, 
in lieu of some arrears of wages), they em- 
barked. 

As they slowly passed up the Rhone, whose 
steep banks, crowned with mountains, exhi- 
bited the most various, wild, and romantic 
scenery, Adeline sat in pensive reverie. The 
novelty of the scene through which she floated, 
now frowning with savage grandeur, and now 
smiling in fertility, and gay with towns and 
villages, soothed her mind, and her sorrow 
gradually softened into a gentle and not un- 
pleasing melancholy. She had seated herself 
at the head of the boat, where she watched 
its sides deave the swift stream, and listened 
to the defying of the waters. 

The boat, slowly opposing the current, 
passed along for some hours, and at length 
the veil of evening was stretched over the 
landscape. The weather was fine, and Ade- 
line, regardless of the dews that now fell, 
remained in the open air, observing the objects 
darken round her, the gay tints of tlie horizon 
fade away, and the stars gradually appear, 
trembling upon the lucid mirror of the waters. 
The scene was now sunk in deep shadow, and 
the silence of the hour was broken only by 
the measured dashing of the oars, and now 
and then by the voice of Peter speaking to 
the boatmen. Adeline sat lost in thought ; 
the forlomness of her circumstances came 
heightened to her imagination. 

She saw herself surrounded by the darkness 
and stillness of night, in a strange place, far 
distant from any friends, going she scarcely 
Icnew whither, under the guidance of strangers, 
and pursued, perhaps, by an inveterate 
enemy. 

She pictured to herself the rage of the Mar- 
quis now that he had discovered her flight, 
and though she knew it very unlikely he 
should follow her by water, for which reason 
she had chosen that manner of travelling, she 
trembled at the portrait her fancy drew. Her 
thoughts then wandered to the plan she 
i^ould adopt after reaching Savoy ; and much 
as her experience had prejudiced her against 
the manners of a convent, she saw no place 
more likely to afford her a proper asylum. At 
length she retired to the little cabin for a few 
hours' repose. 

She awoke with the dawn, and her mind 
being too much disturbed to sleep again, she 
rose and watched the gradual approach of 
day. As she mused, she expressed the feel- 
ings of the moment in the following 



SONNET. 

Mom's beaming eyes at length unclose, 
And wake the ulushes of the rose, 
That all ni^ht lone, oppress'd with dews. 
And veil'd in chilling shade its hues, 
Reclin'd, forlorn, the languid head. 
And sadly sought its parent bed ; 

Warmth from her ray the trembling flower derives. 

And sweetly blushing througli its tears revives. 
Mom's beaming e>'es at length unclose, 
And melt the tears that bend the roM ; 
But can their charms suppress the sigh. 
Or chase the tear from Sorrow's eye? 
Can all their lustrous light impart 
One ray of peace to Sorrow's neart f 

Ah ! no ; their fires her fainting soul oppress ; 

Eve's pensive shades more soothe her meek distress! 

When Adeline left the abl)cy, I^ Motte 
remained for some time at the gate listen- 
ing to the steps of the horse that curried her, 
till the sound was lost in distance ; he then 
turned into the hall with a lightness of heart 
to which he had long been a stranger. ITie 
satisfaction of having thus prcser\'ed her, as 
he hoped, from the designs of the Marc{uio, 
overcame for a while all sense of the danger 
in which this step must involve him. But 
when he returned entirely to his own situation 
the terrors of the Marquis's resentment struck 
their full force upon his mind, and he con- 
sidered how he might best escape it. 

It was now past midnight, the Marquis was 
expected early on the following day, and in 
this interval it at first appeared probable to 
him that he might quit the forest. There 
was only one horse, but he considered whether 
it would be best to set off immediately for 
Auboine, where a carriage might be procured 
to convey his family and his movables from 
the abbey, or quietly to await the arrival of 
the Marquis, and endeavour to impose upon 
him by a forged story of AdeUne's escape. 

The time which must elapse before a car- 
riage could reach the abbey would leave him 
scarcely stifficient to escape from the forest. 
What money he had remaining from the 
Marquis's bounty would not carry him far ; 
and when it was expended he must probably 
be at a loss for subsistence, should he ^not 
before then be detected. By remaining at the 
abbey it would appear that he was uncon- 
scious of deserving the Marquis's resentment; 
and though he could not expect to impress a 
belief upon him that his orders had been exe- 
cuted, he might malce it appear that Peter 
only had been accessory to the escape of 
Adeline ; an account which would seem the 
more probable from Peter's having been for- 
merly detected in a similar scheme. He 
believed also, that if the Marquis should 
threaten to deliver him into the hands of 
justice, he might save himself by a menace of 
disclosing- the crime he had commissioned 
him to perpetrate. 

Thus arguing, La Motte resolved to remain 



102 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



at the abbey, and await the event of the 
Marquis's disappointment. 

When the Marquis did arrive, and was 
informed of Adeline's flight, the strong work- 
ings of his soul, which appeared in his coun- 
tenance, for awhile alarmed and terrified La 
Motte. He cursed himself and her in terms 
of such coarseness and vehemence as La 
Motte was astonished to hear from a man 
whose manners were generally amiable, what- 
ever might be the violence and criminality of 
his passions. To invent and express these 
terms seemed to give him not only relief, but 
delight ; yet he appeared more shocked at the 
circumstance of her escape tlian exasperated 
at the carelessness of La Motte ; and recol- 
lecting at length that he was wasting time, he 
left the abbey, and despatched several of his 
servants in pursuit of her. 

When he was gone La Motte, believing 
his story had succeeded, returned to the plea- 
sure of considering that he had done his duty, 
and to the hope that Adeline was now beyond 
the reach of pursuit. This calm was of short 
continuance. In a few hours the Marquis 
returned, accompanied by the officers of 
justice. The affrighted La Motte, perceiving 
him approach, endeavoured to conceal him- 
self, but was seized and carried to the Mar- 
quis, who drew him aside. 

" I am not to be imposed upon," said he, 
*' by such a superficial story as you have in- 
vented. You know your life is in my hands ; 
tell me instantly where you have secreted 
Adeline, or I will charge you with the crime 
you have committed against me ; but upon 
your disclosing the place of her concealment, 
I will dismiss the officers and, if you wish it, 
assist you to leave the kingdom. You have no 
time to hesitate, and may know that I will 
not be trifled with." 

La Motte attempted to appease the Mar- 

auis, and afiirmed that Adeline was really 
ed he knew not whither. "You will re- 
member, my lord, that your character is also 
in my power ; and that, if you proceed to 
extremities, you will compel me to reveal in 
the face of day that you would have made me 
a murderer." 

"And who will believe you?" said the 
Marquis. "The crimes that banished you 
from society will be no testimony of your 
veracity, and that with which I now charge 
you will bring with it a sufficient presumption 
that your accusation is malicious. Officers, do 
your duty ! " 

They entered the room and seized La 
Motte, whom terror had deprived of all 
power of resistance, could resistance have 
availed him ; and in the perturbation of his 
mind he informed the Marquis that Adeline 
had taken the road to Lyons. This discovery, 
however, was made too late to serve himself ; 
the Marquis seized the advantage it offered, 
but the charge had been given, and, with the 



anguish of knowing that he bad eicposed 
Adeline to danger without benefiting him- 
self, La Motte submitted in silence to his 
fate. Scarcely allowing time to collect what 
little effects might easily be carried with him, 
the officers conveyed nim from the abbey; 
but the Marquis, in consideration of the ex- 
treme distress of Madame La Motte, directed 
one of his servants to procure a carriage from 
Auboine, that she mignt follow ber husband. 

The Marquis in the meantime, now ac- 
quainted with the route Adeline had taken, 
sent forward his faithful valet to tiaoe ber to 
the place of concealment, and return imme- 
diately with intelUgence to the villa. 

Abandoned to despair, La Motte and his 
wife quitted the forest of Fontanville, which 
had for so many months afforded them an 
asylum, and embarked once more upon the 
tumultuous world, where justice wcNild meet 
La Motte in the form of destruction. Thgy 
had entered the forest as a refuge, rendered 
necessary by the former crimes en La Motte, 
and for some time had found in it the aecnrity 
they sought ; but other offences — ^for even in 
that sequestered spot there happened to be 
temptation — soon succeeded ; and his life, 
already sufficiently marked by the punisb- 
ment of vice, now afforded him anofiber in- 
stance of this great truth, "That where guilt 
is, there peace cannot enter." 



CHAPTER XV. 

Hail, awful scenes, that calm the troubled Tirrait. 
And woo the weary to profound repose ! 

Bbatto. 

Adeline, meanwhile, and Peter proceeded 
on their voyage without any accident, and 
landed in Savoy, where Peter placed her upon 
the horse and himself walked beside her. 
When he came within sight of his native 
mountains, his extravagant joy burst forth 
into frequent exclamations, and be would 
often ask Adeline if she had ever seen such 
hills in France. 

"No, no," said he, "the hills there are 
very well for French hills, but they axe not to 
be named on the same day with ours." 

Adeline, lost in admiration of the astomsh- 
ing and tremendous scenery around her, as- 
sented very warmly to the truth of Peter*s 
assertion, which encouraged him to expatiate 
more largely upon the advantages of his 
country — its disadvantages he totally forgot ; 
and although he gave away his last sous to 
the children of the peasantry that ran bare- 
footed by the side of the horse, he spoke of 
nothing but the happiness and content of the 
inhabitants. 

His native village, indeed, was an exception 
to the general character of the coimtry, and to 
the usual effects of an arbitrary government ; 
it was flourishing, healthy, and happy, and 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



»03 



these advantages it chiefly owed to the activity 
and attention of the benevolent clergyman 
whose cure it was. 

Adeline, who now b^[an to feel the effects 
of long anxiety and fatigue, much wished to 
arrive at the end of her journey, and inquired 
impatiently of Peter concerning it. Her spirits 
thus weakened, the gloomy grandeiu- of the 
scenes ndiich had so lately awakened emotions 
of delightful sublimity now awed her into 
terror ; she trembled at the sound of the 
torrents rolling among the cliffs, and thunder- 
ing in thevale below, and shrank from the view 
of the precipices which sometimes overhung 
the roadr-and at others appeared beneath it. 
Fatigued as she was, she frequently dis- 
mounted to dimb on foot the steep flinty road 
which she feared to travel on horseback. 

The day was closing when they drew near 
a small village at the foot of the Savoy Alps, 
and the sun in all his evening splendour, now 
sinking behind their summits, threw a fare- 
well gleam athwart the landscape, so soft 
and glowing, as drew from Adeline, languid 
as she was, an exclamation of rapture. 

The romantic situation of the village next 
attracted her notice. It stood at the foot of 
several stupendous mountains, which formed 
a chain round a lake at some little distance, 
and the woods that swept from their summits 
almost embosomed the village. The lake, 
unruffled by the lightest air, reflected the 
Termefl tints of the horizon >\ith the sublime 
scenery on its borders, darkening every instant 
with the felling twilight. 

"When Peter perceived the village he burst 
into a shout of joy. "Thank God ! " said he, 
•* we are near home. There is my dear native 
place. It looks just as it did twenty years 
ago : and there are the same old trees grow- 
ing round our cottage yonder, and the huge 
rock that rises above it. My poor father died 
there, ma'amselle. Pray heaven my sister be 
aUve ; it's a long while since I saw her." 

Adeline listened with a melancholy pleasure 
to these artless expressions of Peter, who, in 
retracing the scenes of his former days, seemed 
to live them over again. As they approached 
the village he continued to point out various 
objects of his remembrance. 

"And there, too, is the good pastor's 
ch&teau ; look, ma'amselle, that white house, 
with the smoke curling, that stands on the 
edge of the lake yonder. I wonder whether 
he is alive yet. He was not old when I left 
the place, and as much beloved as ever man 
was ; but death spares nobody ! " 

They had now reached the village, which 
was extremely neat, though it did not promise 
much accommodation. Peter had hardly 
advanced ten steps before he was accosted by 
some of his old acquaintance, who shook 
bands and seemed not to know how to part 
with him. He inquired for his sister, and 
was told she was alive and well. As they 



passed on, so many of his old friends flocked 
round him that Adeline became quite weary 
of the delay. Many whom he had left in the 
vigour of life were now tottering under the in- 
firmities of age, while their sons and daughters, 
whom he had only known in the playfulness 
of infancy, were grown from his remembrance, 
and in the pride of youth. At length they 
approached the cottage, and were met by his 
sister, who, having heard of his arrival, came 
and welcomed him with unfeigned joy. 

On seeing Adeline she seemed surprised, 
but assisted her to alight, and conducting her 
into a neat cottage, received her with a 
warmth of kindness which would have graced 
a better situation. Adeline requested to speak 
with her alone, for the room was now crowded 
with Peter's friends, and then acquainting her 
with such particulars of her circumstances as 
it was necessary to communicate, desired to 
know if she could be accommodated with 
lodging in the cottage. 

" Yes, ma'amselle," said the good woman, 
' ' to such as it is you are heartily welcome ; I 
am only sorry it is not better. But you seem 
ill, ma'amselle ; what shall I get you ? " 

Adeline, who had been long struggling with 
fatigue and indisposition, now yielded to their 
pressure. She said she was indeed iU, but 
hoped that rest would restore her, and de- 
sired a bed might be immediately prepared. 
The good woman went out to obey her, and 
soon returning, showed her to a little cabin, 
where she retired to a bed whose cleanliness 
was its only recommendation. 

But, notwithstanding her fatigue, she could 
not sleep ; and her mind, in spite of all her 
efforts, returned to the scenes that were 
past, or presented gloomy and imperfect 
visions of the future. 

The difference between her own condition 
and that of other persons, educated as she 
had been, struck her forcibly, and she wept. 
"They," said she, "have friends and rela- 
tions, all striving to save them, not only from 
what may hurt, but what may displease them, 
watching not only for their present safety, 
but for their future advantage, and prevent- 
ing them even from injuring themselves. But 
during my whole life I have never known a 
friend — have been in geno^ surrounded by 
enemies, and verv seldom exempt from some 
circumstance either of danger or calamity. 
Yet surely I am not bom to be for ever 

wretched ; the time will come when ** 

She began to think she might one time be 
happy ; but recollecting the desperate situa- 
tion of Theodore, "No," said she, "I can 
never hope even for peace ! " 

Early the following morning the good 
woman of the house came to inquire how she 
had rested, and found she had slept little, and 
was much worse than on the preceding night. 
The uneasiness of her mind contributed to 
heighten the feverish symptoms that attended 



I04 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 

bcr. and in the course of the day her disorder tunlty. Sbe oontonplated the put md 

br^nn to n.ssumc a serious nsiH:ct. She ob- viewed the present, and, when she oompared 

&tT\t'ti its ]>rngres.s with conii^osurc, resigning them, the ccHitiast struck her with astooddi- 

horsclf to the will uf (]ud, and feeling little to ment. The whole appeared like one of ihoie 

regret in life. Her kintl hostess did evcr>'- sudden transitions so frequent in dreams, in 

thing in her power to relieve her, and there which we pass from grief and despair, we 

was neither physieian nor aix}theeary in the know not how, to comfort and deilgnt Yet 

\ ilbgc, so that nature was (lei)rived of none she looked forward to the future with a trem- 

of her advantai^es. Notwithstanding this, bling anxiety that threatenol to retard her 

the disorder rapidly inereased, and on the recover}', and which, when she remembered 

third day from its first attack she became the words of her generous beneGutress, she 

delirious,' after which she sank into a state of endeavoured to suppress. Had she better 

siii|K'faction. known the disposition of the penons in 

How long she remained in this deplorable whose house she now was, her anxiety, as 

condition she knew not. but, on recovering far as it regarded herself, must in a great 

lier senses, she found herself in an apartment pleasure have been done away, for La Luc; 

very dilTereiit from any she remembered. It its owner, was one of those rare characters to 

was sjxicious and almost beautiful, the bed whom misfortune seldom Uxda in vain, and 

and everything around being in oni; style of whose native goodness, confirmed by prin- 

elegant simi)licity. Kor some minutes she ciplc, is uniform and unassiuniiw' in its acts. 

Liy in a tr.mce of surprise, endeavouring to The following little picture of fiu domestic 

recollect her scattered idc.is of the past, and life, his family and his mannoi, will more 

almojyi fearing to move, lest the pleasing fully illustrate bis character; it was drawn 

vision should vanish from her eyes. from the life, and its exactness wUl, it ii 

At Irn^ih she vi-ntured to raise herself, hoped, compensate for its length, 
when she presently heard a soft voice speak- 
ing near her, and the bi'd-eurtain on one side THE FAMILY OF LA LUC 
was gently undrawn by a beautiful girl. As p.^^ ^alf mankind, like Handel's fooL destzor. 
she leaned forward over the bed, with a smile Through rage and ignorance, the stnm of joy ; 
of mingled t(.iulenK*ss and joy, she inquired In-egiilarly wild their passions toll 
of her patient iiow siie did. Adeline gazed 'Hirough Nature's finest instrument— the souL 
in silent admiration upon the most interesting )y^>l« '"«» of sense, with Handel's hwier aUC 
female countenanee she had ever seen, in C.orrect the t:wte, and Iprmomse the i^^ 

1 ■ 1 .1 r . -.1 leach tlicir afiections, like his note^ to flow, 

which the expression of .sweetness, united Nor rais'd too high, nor ever siinktoo IwrT 

With lively sense and relmement, was clias- Till evVy virtue, measur'd and refin'd, 

tened by simplicity. As fits the concert of the master mind, 

Adeline at length reeollected herself sufll- ^J«l»s in its kindred sounds, and poun along 

tienily to thank her kind inf|uirer, and begged '^'^'' according music of the moral smd^. 

to know to >\hom she was obliged, and where CAWTHoaiifc 

she was. In the village of I^Ienoourt, celebrated lor 

The lovely girl j^ressed her hand. " 'Tis its picturesque situation at the foot of the 

we who are obliged," .said .she. " Oh, how I Savoy Alps, lived Amaud La Luc, a dogy- 

rejoice to lliul tliat you have recovered your man,' descended from an ancient femily of 

recollection !" France, whose dtHSiyed fortunes occa^ooed 

She said no more, but flew to the door of them to seek a retreat in Switzerland, in an 

the apartment and disi\i)peared. In a few age when the violence of ciiil commotion 

minutes she returned with an elderly lady, seldom spared the conquered. He was mi- 

who, approaching the bed with an air of nister of the village, and equally loved for the 

tender interest, asked concerning the state piety and benevolence of the Christian as 

of Adeline, to which the latter replied as well respected for the dignity and ele\-ation of the 

as the agitation of her spirits would permit, ijhilosopher. His was the philosophy of 

and repeated her desire of knowing to whom nature, directed by common sense ; he 

she was so greatly obliged. desi^sed the jargon of the modem schods, 

"You sliall know that hereafter," said the and the brilliant absurdities of systems. 

lady; "at present be as.sured that you are which have dazzled without enlightening, 

with those who will think their care much and guided without convincing, thdr dis- 

overpaid by your recovery ; submit, there- cii:)les. 

fore, to ever>thing that may conduce to it, His mind was penetrating ; his vien-s ex- 

and consent to be kept as quiet as possible." tensive; and his sj-stems, like his religion. 

Adeline gratefully smiled, and bowed her were simj^le, rational, and sublime. The 

head in silent assent. The lady now quitted people of his parish looked up to him as to a 

to A^J?°i^ ^"^ ^ medicine, having given which f.ither ; for while his precepts directed their 

w^r? f*"^' curtain was closed, and she minds, his example touched their hearts, 

too bSv IS ^^25*^; ^"^ ^«^r thoughts M ere In earlv vouth \jx Luc lost a wife whom he 

usy lo sutler her to profit by the of por- tenderly loved ; thii event threw a tincture of 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



105 



soft and interesting melancholy over his 
crharacter, which remained when time had 
meowed the remembrance that occasioned 
it. Philosophy had strengthened, not har- 
dened, his heart ; it enabled him to resist the 
pressure of afiSiction, rather than to over- 
come it. 

Calamity taught him to feel with peculiar 
sjrmpathy the distresses of others. His income 
from the parish was small, and what remained 
from the divided and reduced estates of his 
ancestors did not much increase it ; but 
though he could not always relieve the neces- 
sities of the indigent, his tender pity and 
holy conversation seldom failed in adminis- 
tering consolation to the mental suiferer. 
On these occasions, the sweet and exquisite 
emotions of his heart have often induced 
bim to say, that could the voluptuary be once 
sen^ble of these feelings, he would never 
^er forego "the luxury of doing good." 
'• Ignorance of true pleasure," he would say, 
"more frequently than temptation to that 
which is false, l«ads to vice." 

La Luc had one son and a daughter, who 
- were too young, when their motlier died, to 
lament their Toss. He loved them with 
peculiar tenderness, as the children of her 
whom he never ceased to deplore ; and it was 
for some time his sole amusement to observe 
the gradual unfolding of their infant minds, 
and to bend them to virtue. His was the 
deep and silent sorrow of the heart ; his 
complaints he never intruded upon others, 
and very seldom did he even mention his 
Vife. His grief was too sacred for the eye of 
the vulgar. Often he retired to the deep 
solitude of the mountains, and amid their 
Solenm and tremendous scenery, would brood 
over the remembrance of times past, and re- 
sign himself to the luxury of grief. On his 
return from these little excursions, he was 
always more placid and contented ; a sweet 
tranquillity, which arose almost to happiness, 
was diffused over his mind, and his manners 
were more than usually benevolent. As he 
grazed on Us children, and fondly kissed 
them, a tear would sometimes steal into his 
eye, but it was a tear of tender regret, un- 
sningled with the darker qualities of sorrow, 
and was precious to his heart. 

On the death of his wife he received into 
his house a maiden sister, a sensible, worthy 
woman, who was deeply interested in the 
happiness of her brothel. Her affectionate 
attention and judicious conduct anticipated 
the effect of time in softening the poignancy 
of his distress ; and her unremitted care of 
his children, while it proved the goodness of 
her own heart, attracted her more closely to 

his. 

It was with inexpressible pleasure that he 
traced in the infant features of Clara the re- 
semblance of her mother. The same gentle- 
ness of manner, and the same sweetness of 



disposition, soon displayed themselves ; and 
as she grew up, her actions often reminded 
him so strongly of his lost wife, as to fix him 
in reveries, which absorbed all his soul. 

Engaged in the duties of his parish, the 
education of his children, and in philosophic 
Research, his years passed in tranquillity. 
1 he tender melancholy with which affliction 
had tinctured his mind was, by long in- 
dulgence, become dear to him, and he 
would not have relinquished it for the 
brightest" dream of airy happiness. When 
any passing incidents disturbed him, he re- 
tired for consolation to the idea of her so 
faithfully loved, and yielding to a gentle, and 
what the world would call a romantic, sad- 
ness, gradually reassumed his composure. 
This was the secret luxury to which he 
withdrew from temporary disappointment — 
the solitary enjoyment which dissipated the 
cloud of care, and blunted the sting of vexa- 
tion—which elevated his mind above this 
world, and opened to his view the sublimity 
of another. 

The spot he now inhabited, the surround- 
ing scenery, the romantic beauties of the 
neighbouring walks, were dear to I^a Luc, 
for they had once been loved by Clara ; they 
had been the scenes of her tenderness, and 
of his happiness. 

His chdteau stood on the borders of a small 
lake that was almost environed by mountains 
of stupendous height, which, shooting into a 
variety of grotesque forms, composed a 
scenery singularly solemn and sublime. Dark 
woods, intermingled with bold projections of 
rock, sometimes barren, and sometimes covered 
with the purple bloom of wild flowers, im- 
pended over the lake, and were seen in the 
clear mirror of its waters. The wild and 
Alpine heights which rose above were either 
crowned with perpetual snows, or exhibited 
tremendous crags and masses of solid rock, 
whose appearance was continually changing 
as the rays of light were variously reflected 
on their surface, and whose summits were 
often wrapt in impenetrable mists. Some 
cottages and hamlets, scattered on the margin 
of the lake, or seated in picturesque points 
of view on the rocks above, were the only 
objects that reminded the beholder of hu- 
manity. 

On the side of the lake, nearly opposite 
to the ch§.teau, the mountains receded, and 
a long chain of Alps were seen in perspec- 
tive. Their innumerable tints and shades, 
some veiled in blue mists, some tinged with 
rich purple, and others glittering in partial 
light, gave luxurious colouring to the scene. 

The chateau was not large, but it was con- 
venient, and was characterised by an air of 
ele.^ant simphcity and good order. The 
entrance was a small hall, which, opening by 
a glass door into the garden, afforded a view 
of the lake, with the magnificent scenerY ^t.- 



io6 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



liibitcd on its borders. On the left of the hall 
was La Luc's study, where he usually passed 
his mornings ; and adjoining was a small 
room fitted up with chemical appsu:atus, 
astronomical instruments, and other imple- 
ments of science. On the right was the 
family parlour, and behind it a room which 
belonged exclusively to Madame La Luc. 
Here were deposited various medicines and 
botanical distillations, together with the 
apparatus for preparing them. From this 
room the whole village was liberally supplied 
with physical comfort ; for it was the pride of 
Madame to believe herself skilful in relieving 
the disorders of her neighbours. 

Behind the ch&teau rose a tuft of pines, and 
in front a gentle dechvity, covered with ver- 
dure and flowers, extended to the lake, whose 
waters flowed even with the grass, and gave 
freshness to the acacias that waved over its 
surface. Flowering shrubs, intermingled with 
mountain-ash, cypress, and evergreen oak, 
marked the boundary of the garden. 

At the return of spring it was Clara's care 
to direct the young shoots of the plants, to 
nurse the budding flowers, and to shelter 
them with the luxuriant branches of the 
shrubs from the cold blasts that descended 
from the mountains. In summer she usually 
rose with the sun, and visited her favourite 
flowers, while the dew yet hung glittering on 
their leaves. The freshness of early day, 
with the glowing colouring which then 
touched the scener)', gave a pure and ex- 
quisite delight to her innocent heart. Bom 
amid scenes of grandeur and sublimity, she 
had quickly imbibed a taste for their channs, 
which taste was heightened by the influence 
of a warm imagination. To view the sun 
rising above the Alps, tinging their snowy 
heac^ with light, and suddenly darting his 
rays over the whole face of nature — to see 
the fiery splendour of the clouds reflected in 
the lake below, and the roseate tints first steal 
upon the rocks above— were among the 
earliest pleasures of which Clara was suscep- 
tible. From being delighted with the observ- 
ance of nature, she grew pleased with seeing 
her finely imitated, and soon displayed a 
taste for poetry and painting. When she was 
about sixteen she often selected from her 
father's library those of the Italian poets most 
celebrated for picturesque beauty, and would 
spend the first hours of morning in reading 
them under the shade of the acacias that 
bordered the lake. Here she would often 
attempt rude sketches of the surrounding 
scenery, and at length, by repeated efforts, 
assisted by some instruction from her brother, 
she succeeded so well as to produce twelve 
drawings in crayon, which were judged 
worthy of decorating the parlour of the 
chateau. 

,. y°^"S La Luc played the flute, and she 

"Siened to him with irreat Hplifxht nnrtim. 



him with great delight, particu- jakp ! 



larly when he stood on the margin of the 
lake, under her beloved acacias, Hervok^ 
was sweet and flexible, but not stion^^, and 
she soon learned to modulate it to the instru- 
ment. She knew nothing of the intricacks 
of execution ; her airs were simple, and her 
style equally so ; but she soon gave them a 
touching expression, inspired bj the sensi- 
bility of her heart, which seldom left those of 
her hearers unaffected. 

It was the happiness of La Luc to see his 
children happy, and in one of his excursions 
to Geneva, whither he went to visit -some re- 
lations of his late wife, he brought Clara a 
lute. She received it with more gratitude 
than she could express ; and bavinjg learned 
one air, she hastened to her favourite acadts 
and played it again and again till she foi|;ot 
everything besides. Her little domestic duties, 
her books, her drawings, evoi the hour whicfa 
her father dedicated to her improvement, 
when she met her brother in the Jumaxy, and 
with him partook of knowledge, even this 
hour passed unheeded by. La Lac suffered 
it to pass. Madame was displeased tluit her 
niece neglected her domestic duties, and 
wished to reprove her, but La Luc begged 
she would be silent. " Let experience teach 
her her error," said he; "prec^ sddom 
brings conviction to young minds." 

Madame objected that experience was a 
slow teacher. " It is a sure one," rqdSed La 
Luc, "and is not unfrequently ibi^ quiciEest 
of all teachers. When it cannot lead us into 
serious evil it is well to trust to It" 

The second day passed wiUi Qaxa as the 
first, and the third as the second. She could 
now play several tunes ; she came to her 
father and repeated what she had leamt 

At the supper the cream was not dresieit 
and there was no fruit on the table. La Lbc 
inquired the reason ; Clara recollected it and 
blushed. She observed that her brother «M 
absent, but nothing was said. Towards the 
conclusion of the repast he appesued ; Us 
countenance expressed unusual satisfiEufUoo, 
but he seated himself in silence. Qara in- 
quired what had detained him firom supper. 
and leamt that he had beeaa to a sick fiunOy 
in the neighbourhood, with the weekly allow- 
ance which her father gave them. La Lac 
had entrusted the care of this feoiuly to his 
daughter ; and it was her duty to have carried 
them their little allowance on the preoediiig 
day, but she had forgotten everyming hot 
music. 

" How did you find tlie woman? " said La 
Luc to his son. 

" Worse, sir," he replied ; "for her medi- 
cines had not been regularly given, and the 
children had little or no food to-day." 

Clara was shocked. " No food to-day I" 
said she to herself, "and I have been playinf 
all day on my lute under the ac£tgias by tiM 






THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



107 



Her £aither did not seem to observe her emo- 
tion, but turned to his son. 

"Heft her better," said the latter ; " the 
medicines I carried eased her pain, and I had 
the pleasure to see her children make a joy- 
ful supper." 

Clara, perhaps for the first time in her life, 
envied him his pleasure ; her heart was full, 
and she sat silent. " No food to-day ! " 
thought she. 

She retired pensively to her chamber. The 
sweet serenity with which she usually went to 
rest was vamshed, for she could no longer 
reflect on the pa^ da^ with satisfaction. 

"What a pity," said she, "that what is so 

? leasing should be the cause of so much pain I 
"bis lute is my delight and my torment I " 
This reflection occasioned her much internal 
debate; but before she could come to any 
moiution upon the point in question she fell 
asleep. 

She awoke very early the next morning, and 
impatiently watdied the progress of the dawn. 
The sun at length appearing, she arose, and, 
determined to make all the atonement in her 
power for her former neglect, hastened to the 
cottage. 

Here she remained a considerable time, and 
when she retured to the ch&teau her counte- 
nance had recovered all its usual serenity ; 
she resolved, however, not to touch her lute 
that day. 

Till the hour of breakfast she busied her- 
self in binding up the flowers and pruning the 
Aoots that were too luxuriant ; and she at 
length foimd herself, she scarcely knew how, 
boicath her beloved acacias by the side of 
the lake. "Ahl" said she with a sigh, 
"how sweetly would the song I learned 
jtsmetday sound now over the waters ! " But 
■he remembered her determination, and 
cbeclrrd the step she was involuntarily taking 
towards the ch&teau. 

She attended her father in the library at 
the usual hour, and learned from his dis- 
DOurse with her brother on what had been 
read the two preceding days, that she had 
Lost much entertaining knowledge. She re- 

aaested her father would inform her to what 
lis omversation alluded ; but he calmly 
replied that she had preferred another amuse- 
ment at the time when the subject was dis- 
cussed, and must therefore content herself 
with ignorance. "You would reap the re- 
wards of study from the amusements of idle- 
ness," said he ; "learn to be reasonable — do 
not expect to unite inconsistencies." 

Qara felt the justness of this rebuke, and 
remembered her lute. "What mischief 
has it occasioned!" sighed she. "Yes, I 
am determined not to touch it all this day. 
I will prove that I am able to control my 
inclinations when I see it necessary so to do." 
Thus resolving, she applied herself to study 
with more th^ usual assiduity. 



She adhered to her resolution, and towards 
the close of day went into the garden to 
amuse herself. The evening was still, and 
uncommonly beautiful. Nothing was heard 
but the faint shivering of the leaves, which 
returned but at intervals — making silence 
more solemn— and the distant murmurs of 
the torrents that rolled among the cliffs. As 
she stood by the lake and watched the sun 
slowly sinking below the Alps, whose sunmiits 
were tinged with gold and purple ; as she 
saw the last rays of light gleam upon the 
waters, whose surface was not curlea bv the 
lightest air, she sighed, "Oh, how enchant- 
ing would be the sound of my lute at this 
moment, on this spot, and when everything 
is so still around me ! " 

The temptation was too powerful for the 
resolution of Clara ; she ran to the cliAteau, 
returned with the instrument to her dear 
acacias, and beneath their shade continued 
to play till the surrounding objects faded in 
darkness from her sight. But the moon 
arose, and, shedding a trembling lustre on the 
lake, made the scene more captivating than 
ever. 

It was impossible to quit so delightful a 
spot ; Clara repeated her favourite airs again 
and again. The beauty of the hour awa- 
kened all her genius ; she never played with 
such expression before, and she listened with 
increasing rapture to the tones as they lan- 
guished over the waters and died away on tibe 
distant air. She was perfectly enchanted. 

" No ! nothing was ever so delightful as to 
play on the lute beneath her acacias, on the 
margin of the lake, by moonlight I " 

When she returned to the ch&teau, supper 
was over. La Luc had observed Clara, and 
would not suffer her to be interrupted. 

When the enthusiasm of the hour was 
passed, she recollected that she had broken 
her resolution, and the reflection gave her 
pain. 

" I prided myself on controlling my incli- 
nations," said she, "and I have weakly 
yielded to their direction. But what evil have 
I incurred by indulging them this evening ? 
I have neglected no duty, for I had none to 
perform. Of what then have I to accuse my- 
self? It would have been absurd to have 
kept my resolution, and denied myself a 
pleasure, when there appeared no reason for 
this self-denial." 

She paused, not quite satisfied with this 
reasoning. Suddenly resuming her in- 
quiry : 

" But how," said she, "am I certain that 
I should have resisted my inclinations if th«-e 
had been a reason for opposing them? If 
the poor family whom I neglected yesterday 
had been unsupplied to-day, I fear I should 
again have forgotten them while I played on 
my lute on the banks of the lake." 

§he then recollected all that.b«c l'^^3QKt^ia4 



loS 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



nt different times said on the subject of self- 
command, and she felt some pain. 

" No," said she, " if I do not consider that 
to preserve a resolution whic'i I have once 
solemnly formed is a suflicicnt reason to con- 
trol my inclinations, I fear no other motive 
would long restrain me. I seriously determined 
not to touch my lute this whole day, and I 
have broken my resolution. To-morrow, per- 
haps, I may be tempted to neglect some duty, 
for I have discovered that 1 cannot rely on 
my own prudence. Since I cannot conquer 
temptation, I will fly from it." 

On the following morning she brought her 
lute to I^ Luc, and begged he would receive 
it again, and at least keep it till she had 
taught her inclinations to submit to control. 

The heart of La Luc swelled as she spoke. 

"No, Clara," said he, "it is unnecessary 
that I should receive your lute ; the sacrifice 
you would make proves you worthy of my 
confidence. Take back the instrument ; since 
you have sufficient resolution to resign it 
when it leads you from duty, I doubt not that 
you will be able to control its influence now 
that it is restored to you." 

Clara felt a degree of pleasure and pride at 
these words, such as she had never before 
experienced, but she thought that to deserve 
the commendation they bestowed, it was 
necessary to complete the sacrifice she had 
begun. In the virtuous enthusiasm of the 
moment, the delights of nuisic were forgotten 
in those of aspiring to well-earned praise ; and 
when she refused the lute thus offered she 
was conscious only of exquisite sensations. 

"Dear sir," said she, tears of pleasure 
swelling in her eyes, "allow me to deser\'e 
the praises you bestow, and then I shall in- 
deed be happy." 

Ija I^uc thought she had never resembled 
her mother so much as at this instant, and, 
tenderly kissing her, he for some moments 
wept in silence. When he was able to speak : 

" You do already deserve my praises," said 
he, "and I restore your lute as a reward for 
the conduct that excites them." 

This scene called back recollections too 
tender for the heart of La Luc, and giving 
Clara the instrument, he abmptly quitted the 
room. 

La Luc's son, a youth of much promise, 
was designed by his father for the church, 
and had received from him an excellent edu- 
cation, which, however, it was thought ne- 
cessary he should finish at a university — 
that of Geneva was fixed upon by La Luc. 
His scheme had been to make his son not a 
scholar only, lie was ambitious that he should 
also be enviable as a man. From early in- 
fancy he had accustomed him to hardihood 
and endurance, and as he advanced in youth, 
he encouraged him in manly exercises, and 
acquainted him with the useful arts as well as 
with abstract science. 



He was high-spirited and ardent in his 
temper, iTut his heart was generous and aflfec- 
tionate. He looked forward to Geneva, and 
to the new world it would disdose, with Ijbe 
sanguine expectations of youth ; and in the 
delight of these expectations was absoibed 
the regret he would otherwise have fdt at a 
separation from his family. 

A brother of the late MacuuotieLaLuc, who was 
by birth an Englishwoman, resided at Geneva 
with his HaLmily. To have been related to his 
wife was a sufficient claim upon the heart of 
La Luc, and he had, therefore, always kept 
up an intercourse with Mr. Audley, though 
the difference in their characters and manner 
of thinking would never permit this associa- 
tion to advance into friendship. La Luc now 
wrote to him, signifying an intention of send- 
ing his son to Geneva, and reoommendiog 
him to his care. To this letter Mr. Audlef 
returned a friendly answer, and, a diort time 
after, an acquaintance of La Luc's btaag 
called to Geneva, he determined that his son 
should accompany him. Tlie separation vai 
painful to La Luc, and almost insupportabk 
to Clara. Madame was grieved, and took care 
that he should Iiave a sufficient quantity d 
medicines put in his travellinj? trunk; she 
was also at some pains to pomt out thdr 
virtues, and the different complaints for whi^ 
they were requisite, but she was careful to 
deliver her lecture during the absence of her 
brother. 

La Luc, with his daughter, accompanied 
his son on horseback to the next town, whidi 
was about eight miles from Leloicourt, apd 
there again enforcing all the advice he had 
formerly given him respecting his conduct and 
pursuits, and again yielding - to the tender 
weakness of the father, he bade him fiuewd. 
Clara wept, and felt more sorrow at iUs 
parting than the occasion could justify ; bat 
this was almost the first time she had knowB 
grief, and she artlessly yielded to its influenoe. 

I^a I^uc and Clara travelled pensively badd 
and the day was closing when they came 
within view of the lake, and soon ancr tbe 
chateau. Never had it appeared c^Ioomj til 
now ; but now, Clara wandered forlornly 
through every deserted apartment where she 
had been accustomed to see her brother, and 
recollected a thousand litde circumstanoeSt 
which, had he l)een present, she would have 
thought immaterial, but on which imagination 
now stamped a value. The garden, the 
scenes around, all wore a melancholy aspect. 
and it was long ere they resumed their natural 
character, and Clara recovered her vivacity. 

Near four years had elapsed since thb 
separation, when one evening, as Madame 
La Luc and her niece were sitting at woik 
together in the parlour, a good woman in the 
neighbourhood desired to be admitted. She 
came to ask for some medicines and the 
advice of Madame La Luc. '* Here is a sad 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



109 



accident happened at our cottage, madam," 
said she ; " I am sure my heart aches for the 
poor young creature." Madame I^ Luc 
desired she would explain herself; and tlic 
woman proceeded to say, that her brother 
Peter, whom she had not seen for so many 
years, was arrived, and had brought a young 
lady \o her cottage, who she verily believed 
was dying. She described licr disorder, and 
acquainted Madame with what particulars of 
her mournful story Peter had related, failing 
not to exaggerate such as her compassion for 
the unhappy stranger and her love of the 
marvellous prompted. 

Tlie account appeared a very extraordinary 
one to Madame ; but pity for the forlorn 
condition of the young sufferer induced her 
to inquire further into the affair. ' ' Do let 
me go to her, madam," said Clara, who had 
been listening with ready compassion to the 
poor woman's narrative ; "do suffer me to 
go — she must want comforts, and I wish 
much to see how she is." Madame askod 
some further questions concerning her disorder, 
and then, taking off her spectacles, she arose 
from her chair and said she would go herself. 
Clara desired to accompany her. They init 
on their hats and followed the good woman 
to the cottage, where, in a very small, close 
room, on a miserable bed, lay Adeline, i)ale, 
emaciated, and unconscious of all around 
her. 

Madame turned to the woman and asked 
how long she had been in this way, while Clara 
went up to the bed, and taking the almost 
fifdess hand that lay on the quilt, looked 
anxiously in her face. ' ' She observes nothing, ' ' 
said she, "poor creature 1 I wish she was at 
the chateau ; she would be better accom- 
modate, and I could nurse her there." 

The woman told Madame La Luc that the 
voung lady had lain in that state for several 
hours. Madame examined her pulse, and 
shook her head. " This room is very close," 
said she. 

•• Very dose, indeed," cried Clara, eagerly. 
* ' Surely she would be better at the chdteau, 
if she could be moved." 

"We will see about that," said her aunt. 
••In the meantime let me speak to Peter ; it 
is some years since I saw him." She went to 
the outer room, and the woman ran out of 
the cottage to look for him. When she was 
gone, "This is a miserable habitation for the 
poor stranger," said Clara; "she will never 
be well here ; do, madam, let her be carried 
to our house ; I am sure my father would 
wsh it. Besides, there is something in her 
features, even inanimate as they now arc, that 
prejudices me in her favour." 

"Shall I never persuade you to give up 
that romantic notion of judging people by 
their faces?" said her aunt. " What sort of a 
face slie has is of very little consecjuence ; her 
condition is lamentable, and 1 am desirous of 



amending it, but I wish first to ask Peter a 
few qncitions concerning her." 

"Thank you, my dciU- .aunt," said (!l.irn ; 
"she will be removed then !" Madame La 
I^uc was going to reply, but Peter now enlcn'd, 
and, expressing great joy at seeing her again, 
inquired how Monsieur I-a Luc and ("lara 
did. Clara immediately welcomed h<<nost 
Peter to his native place, and he rcturnc«l 
her salutation with many exprc>si<ins «>f sur- 

frisc at fmding her so much grown. ' ' Thoujjli 
liave so often dandled you in my arms, 
ma'amselle, I should never have kn'jwn you 
again. Young twigs shoot fast, as they 
sfiy," 

Madame T^a I^uc now inquired into the 
particulars of Adeline's story, and heard as 
much as Peter knew of it, being only that his 
late master founi her in a very disire.ss'id 
situation, and that he had himself brought 
her from the abbey to save her from a French 
marquis. The simplicity of Peter's manner 
would not suffer her to question his veracity, 
though some of the circumstances he related 
excited all her surprise, and awakened all her 
pity. Tears frequently stood in Clara's eyes 
during the course of his narrative, and when 
he concluded she said, " Dear madam, 1 am 
sure, when my father learns the history of this 
unhappy young woman, he will not refuse to 
be a parent to her, and I wll be her sister." 

" She deserves it all," said Peter, "for she 
is very good indeed." He then proceeded in 
a strain of praise which was very unusual with 
him. ' ' I will go home and consult with my 
brother about her," said Madame I^i Luc, 
rising ; ' ' she certainly ought to be removed to 
a more airy room. The chateau is so near, 
that I think she may be carried thither with- 
out much risk." 

" Heaven bless you, madam 1 " cried Peter, 
rubbing his hands, " for your goodness to my 
poor young lady." 

La Luc had just returned from his evening 
walk when they reached the chateau. Madame 
told him where she had been, and related the 
history of Adeline and her present condition. 
"By all means have her removed hither," said 
La Luc, whose eyes bore testimony to the 
tenderness of his heart. " She can be better 
attended to here than in Susan's cottage." 

' ' I knew you would say so, my dear father," 
said Clara ; " I will go and order the green 
bed to be prepared for her." 

" Be patient, niece," said Madame La Luc; 
" there is no occasion for such haste. Some 
things are to be considered first, but you 
are young and romantic." La Luc smiled. 
" The evening is now closed," resumed Ma- 
dame, " it will, therefore, be dangerous to re- 
move her before morning. Early to-morrow 
a room shall be got ready, and she shall be 
brought here ; in the meantime I will go and 
make up a medicine, which I hope may be of 
service to her." Clara ieiVMC\ai.xv\\"^ ^s»^w\.^W.q 



„0 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

this delay, and Madame La Luc retired to The strong emotions o|f surprise and grati- 
hcr closet tude for some time kept Adeline silent. 

On the following morning Adeline, wrapped " Do not thaiA me." said La I^c ; "I 
in blankets, and sheltered as much as possible know aU you would say, and I also faow that 
from the air, was brought to the chateau, I am but doing my duty. I thank God thai 
where the good La Luc desired she might my duty and my pleasures are generaUy m 
have every attention paid her, and where unison." -. . u- 

Clara watched over her with unceasing anxiety Adeline wiped away the tean which bis 
and tenderness. She remained in a state of goodness had excited, and was going to speak; 
torpor during the greater part of the day, but but I^ Luc preyed her hand, and turning 

' ' away to conceal his emotion, walked out of 
the room. 

Adeline was now considered as a part of 
the family, and in the parental kindness of 
I^ I^uc, the sisterly affection of Claza, and 



towards evening she breathed more freely ; 
and Clara, who still watched by her bed, had 
at length the pleasure of perceiving that her 
senses were restored. It was at this moment 

that she found herself in the situation from . .* _j _* »* j 

which we have digressed to give this account the steady and uniform regard or Madame, 
of the venerable Ui Luc and his family. The she would have been happy as die ms thank- 
reader will find that his virtues and his friend- ful, had not unceasing anxiety for the fate of 



ship to Adeline deserved this notice. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

Still Fancy, to herself unkind, 
Awakes to grief the soften'd mind, 
And points the bleeding friend. 

Collins. 



Theodore, of whom in this sotitnde she was 
less likely than ever to hear, corroded her 
heart, and embittered every moment of reflec- 
tion. Even when sleep obliterated for awhile 
the memory of the past, his image frequently 
arose to her fancy, accompanied by all the ex- 
aggerations of terror. She saw him in chains, 
and struggling in the grasp of mflfians ,* or 
saw him led, amidst the dreadful preparations 
for execution, into the field ; she saw the 



Adeline, assisted by a fine constitution, and agony of his look, and heard him repeat her 

the kind attentions of her new friends, was, in name in frantic accents, till the horrors of the 

a little more than a week, so much recovered scene overcame her, and she awok& 

as to leave her chamber. She was introduced A similarity of taste and character attached 

to La Luc, whom she met with tears of grati- her to Clam, yet the misery that preyed upon 

tude, and thanked for his goodness in a man- her heart was of a nature too ddicate to be 

ner so warm, yet so artless, as interested him spoken of, and she never mentioned Theodore 

still more in her favour. During the progress even to her friend. Her iUness had yet left 



her weak and languid, and the perpetual 
anxiety of her mind contributed to proloag 
this state. She cndeavoiu^, by strong and 
almost continual efforts, to abstract her 



of her recovery, the sweetness of her Ixjhaviour 

had entirely won the heart of Clara and greatly 

interested that of her aunt, whose reports of 

Adeline, together with the praises bestowed 

by Clara, had excited both esteem and curiosity thoughts from their mournful subject, and 

was often successful. La Luc had an ezoeOent 
library, and the instruction it offered at onee 
gratified her love of knowledge and withdrew 
her mind from painful recollections. His 
conversation, too, afforded her anotho* refuge 
from miser}'. 

But her chief amusement was to wander 
among the sublime scenery of the adjacent 
country, sometimes with CLira, tiioueh often 
with no other companion than a book. There 
were indeed times when the conversation of 
her friend imposed a painful restndnt, and, 
when given up to reflection, she would ramble 



in the breast of La Luc ; and he now met her 
with an expression of benignity which spoke 
peace and comfort to her heart. She had 
acquainted Madame La Luc with such par- 
ticulars of her .story as Peter, either through 
ignorance or inattention, had not communi- 
cated, suppressing only, through a false deli- 
cacy, perhaps, an acknowledgment of her 
attachment to Theodore. These circum- 
stances were repeated to La Luc, who, ever 
sensible to the sufferings of others, was par- 
ticularly interested by the singular misfortunes 
of Adeline. 



Near a fortnight had elapsed since her re- alone througli scenes whose solitary grandeur 



moval to the chAteau, when one inornmg 
La Luc desired to speak with her alone. She 
followed him into his study, and then, in a 
manner the most delicate, he told her that as 
lie found she was so unfortunate in her father, 
he desired she would henceforth consider him 
as her parent, and his house as her home. 

• ' You and Clara shall be equally my 
daughters," continued he ; "I am rich in 
having such children." 



assisted and soothed the melancholy of her 
heart. Here she would retrace all the conduct 
of her beloved Theodore, and endeavour to 
recollect his exact countenance, his air, and 
manner. Now she would weep at the re- 
membrance, and then, suddenly considering 
that he had, perhaps, already suffered an 
ignominious death for her sake, even in con^ 
sequence of the very action which had proved 
Yv\s \o\(i, ^1 dx«3L^>3i <!jes^^air wotild seixe her, 



TffE HOMAMCE OP THE POREST, 



lit 



and, arrestinjf her tears, would threaten to 
bear dovm every barrier that fortitude and 
reason could oppose. 

Fearing longer to trust to her o^ra thoughts 
she would hurry home, and by a desperate 
effort would try to lose, in the conversation of 
La Luc, the remetnbrance of the past. Her 
melandioly, when he observed it, La Luc 
attributed to a sense of the cruel treatment 
she had received from her father ; a circum- 
stance which, by exciting his compassion, 
endeared her strongly to his heart ; while that 
love of rational conversation, which, in her 
calmer hours, so frequently appeared, opened 
to him a new source of amusement in the 
cultivation of a mind eager for knowledge, 
and susceptible of all the energies of genius. 
She found a melancholy pleasure in listening 
to the soft tones of Clara's lute, and would 
often soothe her mind by attempting to repeat 
the airs she heard. 

The gentleness of her manners, partaking 
so much of that pensive character which 
marked La Luc's, was soothing to his heart, 
and tinctured his behaviour with a degree of 
tenderness that imparted comfort to her, and 
gradually won her entire confidence and affec- 
tion. She saw, with extreme concern, the 
declining state of his health, and united her 
dSbrts with those of the family to amuse and 
rcjvive him. 

The pleasing society of which she partook, 
and the quietness of the country, at length 
restoired her mind to a state of tolerable com- 
posure. She was now acquainted with all the 
wild walks of the neighbouring mountains, 
and, never tired of viewing their scenery, she 
olten indulged herself in traversing alone 
their unfrequented paths, where now and 
then a peasant from a neighbouring village 
was all that interrupted the profound solitude. 
She generally took with her a book, that, if 
she perceived her thoughts inclined to fix on 
the one object of her grief, she might force 
them to a subject less dangerous to her peace. 
She had become a tolerable proficient in 
English m^e at the convent, where she re- 
ceived her education, and the instruction of 
La Luc, who was well acquainted with the 
language, now served to perfect her. He was 
partial to the English ; he admired their 
character and the constitution of their laws, 
and his library contained a collection of the 
best authors, particularly of their philosophers 
and poets. 

Adeline found that no species of writing 
had power so effectually to \vithdraw her 
mind from the contemplation of its misery as 
the higher kinds of poetry, and in these her 
taste soon taught her to distinguish the supe- 
riority of the English over that of the French. 
The genius of the language, more, perhaps, 
than the genius of the people — if, indeed, the 
distinction may be allowed — occasioned this. 

She frequentlj took a volume of Shakspeare 



or Milton, and having gained some wild emi- 
nence, would seat herself beneath the pines, 
whose low miumurs .soothed her heart, and 
conspired with the visions of the poet to lull 
her to forgetfulness of grief. 

One evening, when Clara was engaged at 
home, Adeline wandered alone to a favourite 
spot among the rocks that bordered the lake. 
It was an eminence which commanded an 
entire view of the lake, and of the stupendous 
mountains that environed it. A few ragged 
thorns grew from the precipice beneath, which 
descended perpendicularly to the water's edge ; 
and above rose a thick wood of larch, pine, 
and fir, intermingled with some chestnut and 
mountain-ash. The evening was fine, and 
the air so still, that it scarcely waved the light 
leaves of the trees Jiround, or rippled the 
broad expanse of the waters below. Adeline 
gazed on the scene with a kind of still rapture, 
and watched the sun sinking amid a crimson 
glow, which tinted the bosom of the lake and 
the snowy heads of the distant Alps. The 
delight which the scenery inspired. 

Soothing each gust of passion into peace. 
All but the swellings of the soften'd heart. 
That waken, not disturb, the tranquil mind ! 

was now heightened by the tones of a French 
horn, and looking on the lake, she perceived, 
at some distance, a pleasure-boat. As it was 
a spectacle rather uncommon in this solitude, 
she concluded the boat contained a party of 
foreigfners come to view the wonderful scenery 
of the country, or perhaps of Gcnevois, who 
chose to amuse themselves on a lake almost 
as grand, though much less extensive, than 
their own ; and the latter conjecture was pro- 
bably just. 

As she listened to the mellow and enchant- 
ing tones of the horn, which gradually sank 
away in distance, the scene appeared more 
lovely than before, and finding it impossible 
to forbear attempting to paint in language 
what was so b«iutiful in reality, she com- 
posed the following 

STANZAS. 

How smooth that lake expands its ample breast ! 

Where smiles in soften'd glow the summer sky ; 
How vast the rocks that o'er its surface rest ; 

How wild the scenes its winding shores supply ! 

Now down the western steep slow sinks the sun, 
And paints with yellow gieam the tufted woods ; 

While here the mountain-shadows, broad and dun, 
Sweep o'er the crystal mirror of the floods. 

Mark how his splendour tips with partial light 
Those shattered battlements ! that on the brow 

Ofyon bold promontory burst to sight 
From o'er the woods that darkly spread below. 

In the soft blush of light's reflected power, 
The ridgy rock, the woods that crown its steep^ 

Th' illumin d bau\etneivt» ^xvd ^mV« \xy»iw^ 
On the smooth v^avc Vti \xw£CcK«v^\«.'Kax^ ^«k^. 



113 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



But lo 1 the sun recalls his fervid ray, 
And cold, and dim, the wat'ry visions foil ; 

While o'er yon cliff, whose pointed craes decay, 
Mild evening draws her thin empurpled veil I 

How sweet that strain of melancholy horn I 
ITiat floats along the slowly- ebbing wave ; 

And up the far-receding mountains borne. 
Returns a dying close from Echo's cave ! 

Hail ! shadowy forms of still, expressive eve ; 

Your pensive graces, stealing on my heart, 
Bid all the fine-attun'd emotions live, _ 

And Fancy all her loveliest drexuns impart. 

La Luc, obscn-ing how much Adeline wjis 
charmed with the features of the country, and 
desirous of amusing her melancholy, which, 
notwithstanding her efforts, was ohen too 
apparent, wished to show her other scenes 
than those to which her walks were circum- 
scribed. He proposed a party on horseback 
to take a nearer view of the glaciers ; to 
attempt their ascent was a difficulty and 
fatigue to which neither La Luc, in his present 
state of health, nor Adeline was equal. She 
had not been accustomed to ride single, and 
the mountainous road they were to pass made 
the experiment rather dangerous ; but she 
concealed her fears, and they were not suflTi- 
cicnt to make her wish to forego an enjoyment 
such as was now offered her. 

The following day was fixed for this ex- 
cursion. La Luc and his party arose at an 
early hour, and having taken a slight breakfast, 
they set out towards the glacier of Montanvert, 
which lay at a few leagues' distance. Peter 
carried a small basket of provisions ; and it 
was their plan to dine on some spot in the 
open air. 

It is unnecessaty to describe the high 
enthusiasm of Adeline, the more complacent 
pleasure of La Luc, and the transports of 
Clara, as the scenes of this romantic country 
shifted to their eyes. Now frowning in dark 
and gloomy grandeur, it exhibited only tre- 
mendous rocks, and cataracts rolling from the 
heights into some deep and narrow valley, 
along which their united waters roared arid 
foamed, and burst away to regions inaccessible 
to mortal foot ; and now the scene arose less 
fiercely wild ; 

llie pomp of groves and garniture of fields 

were intermingled with the mder features of 
nature, and while the snow froze on the 
summit of the mountain, the \'ine blushed at 
its foot. 

Engaged in interesting conversation, and 
by the admiration which the country excited, 
they travelled on till noon, when they looked 
round for a pleasant spot where they might 
rest and take refreshment. At some little 
distance they perceived the ruins of a fabric, 
which had once been a castle ; it stood nearly 
on a point of rock that overhung a deep 
valley ; and its broken tiurets, rising from 



among the woods that embosomed it, height- 
ened the picturesque beauty of the object. 

The edifice invited curiosity, and the shades 
repose. La Luc and his party advanced. 

Deep struck with awe they nuuik'd the dooie 

o'erthrown, 
Where once the beauty bloomM, the vanior shone; 
They saw the castle's mould'ring towVi decay'cC 
The loose stone tottering o'er the tremhIinK shade. 

They seated themselves on the grasSt under 
the shade of some high trees, near the ruins. 
An opening in the woods afforded a view of 
the distant Alps— the deep silence of solitude 
reigned. For some time they were lost in 
meditation. 

Adeline felt a sweet complacency such as 
she had long been a stranger to. Looking at 
I^ Luc, she perceived a tear stealing down 
his cheek, while the elevation of his mind was 
strongly expressed on his coimtenance. He 
turned on Clara his eyes, which were now filled 
with tenderness, and made an effort to reco\'er 
himself. 

"The stillness and total seclusion of this 
scene," said Adeline, " those stupendous 
mountains, the gloomy grandeur of these 
woods, together with that monimient of faded 
glory on which the hand of time is so em- 
phatically impressed, diffuse a sacnd enthu- 
siasm over the mind, and awaken sensationa 
truly sublime." 

I^a Luc was going to speak ; but Peter, 
coming forward, desired to know whether he 
had not better open the wallet, as he fancied 
his honour and the young ladies mtist be 
main hungry, jogging on so far up-hill and 
down before dinner. They acknowledged the 
truth of honest Peter's suspicion, and ac- 
cepted his hint. 

Refreshments were spread on the grass, and 
having seated themselves under the canopy d[ 
waving woods, surrounded by the sweets of 
wild flowers, they inhaled the pure breeze of 
the Alps, which might be called spirit of air, 
and partook of a repast which these' circum- 
stances rendered delicious. 

When they arose to depart, " I am unwil- 
ling," said Clara, " to quit this charming spot. 
How dehghtful would it be to pass one's life 
beneath these shades, with the friends who 
are dear to one ! " La Luc smiled at the 
romantic simplicity of the idea ; but Adeline 
sighed deeply at the image of felicity, and of 
Theodore, which it recalled, and turned away 
to conceal her tears. 

They now mounted their horses, and soon 
after arrived at the foot of Montanvert. The 
emotions of Adeline, as she contemplated in 
various points of view the astonishing objects 
around her, surpassed all expression ; and the 
feelings of the whole party were too strong to 
admit of conversation. The profound stillness 
vfYdcYi ie\^ed \xi >}[i<»ft toisAns of solitude 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 113 

inspired awe, and heightened the sublimity of appeared to support her with difficuhy. The 

the scenery to an exquisite degree. compassion expressed in his countenance, 

•• It seems," said Adeline, "as if we were while he inquired how she did, revived her 

walking over the ruins of the world, and were spirits, and she was endeavouring to thank 

the only persons who had survived the wreck, him for his kindness, when \jx Luc and 

I can scarcely persuade myself that we are not Adeline came up. The terror impressed upon 

left alone on the globe." her father's features was perceived by Clara ; 

" The view of these objects," said La Luc, languid as she >*-as, she tried to raise herself, 

" lifts the soul to their Great Author, and we and said, with a faint smile, which betrayed 

contemplate with a feeling almost too vast for instead of disguising her sufferings, "Dear 

humanity, the sublimit v of his nature in the sir, I am not hurt." Her pale countenance, 

grandeur of his works. ' La Luc raised his and the bloo<l that trickled down her cheek, 

eyes, filled with tears, to heaven, and was for contradicted her words. Hut I^ Luc. to 

some moments lost in silent adoration. whom terror had suggested the utmost pos< 

They quitted these scenes with extreme re- sible evil, now rejoiced to hear her speak ; he 

luctance, but the hoiu- of the day, and the recalled some presence of mind, and whilo 

appearance of the clouds, which seemed Adeline applied Ler salts, he chafed her 

gadiering for a storm, made them hasten temples. 

their departure. Adeline almost wished to When she revived she told him how much 

have witnessed the tremendous effect of a she was obliged to the stranger. I^i Luc 

Uiunderstorm in these regions. endeavoured to express his gratitude, but the 

They returned to Lelencourt by a different former, interrupting him, Ijcgged he might be 

route, and the shade of the overhanging pre- spared the pain of receiving thanks for having 

cipices was deepened by the gloom of the followed only an impulse of common hu« 

atmosphere. It was evening when they came raanity. 

within view of the lake, which the travellers Thtry were now not far from lelencourt ; 

rejoiced to see. For the storm so long but the evening was almost shut in, and the 

threatened was now fast approaching ; the thunder murmured deeply among the hills, 

thunder murmured among the Alps, and the La Luc was distressed now to convey Clara 

dark vapours that rolled heavily along their home. 

sides, heightened their dreadful sublimity. In endeavouring to raise her from the ground 

La Luc would have quickened his pace, but the stranger betrayed such symptoms of pain, 

the road winding down the steep side of a that I^ Luc inquired concerning it. The 

mountain, made caution necessary. Tlie sudden jerk whicn the horse had given the 

daxicening air, and the lightnings that now arm of the chevalier in escaping from his 

flashed along the horizon, terrified Clara, but hold had violently sprained his shoulder, and 

she withheld the expression of her fear in rendered his arm almost useless. The pain 

consideration of her father. A jaeal of thunder, was exquisite, aud La Luc, whose fears for 

which seemed to shake the earth to its founda- his daughter were now subsiding, was shocked 

lions, and was reverberated in tremendous at the circumstance, and pressed the stranger 

echoes from the cliffs, burst over their heads, to accompany him to the village, where relief 

Clara's horse took fright at the sound, and, might be obtained. He accepted the invita- 

setting off, hurried her with amazing velocity tion. and Clara, being at length placed on a 

down the mountain towards the lake, which horse led by her father, was conducted to the 

washed its foot. The agony of La Luc. who chdtcau. 

viewed her progress in the horrible expccta- When Madame, who had been looking out 

tion of seeing her dashed down the precipice for La Luc some time, perceived the caval- 

that bordered the road, is not to be described, cade approaching she was alarmed, and her 

Clara kept her seat, but terror had almost apprehensions were confirmed when she saw 

deprived her of sense. Her efforts to preserve the situation of her niece. Clara was carried 

herself were mechanical, for she scarcely knew into the house, and La Luc would have sent 

what she did. The horse, however, carried for a surgeon, but there were none within 

her safely almost to the foot of the mountain, several leagues of the village, neither were 

but was making towards the lake when a there any of the physical profession within 

gentleman, who travelled along the road, the same . distance. Clara x^-as assisted to her 

caught the bridle as the animal endeavoured chamber by Adeline, and Madame La Luc 

to pass. The sudden stopping of the horse undertook to examine the wounds. The 

thi^w Clara to the ground, and, impatient of result restored peace to the family ; for 

restraint, the animal burst from the hand of though she was much bruised she had escaped 

the stranger, and plunged into the lake. The material injury ; a slight contusion on the 

violence of the fall deprived her of recollec- forehead had occasioned the bloodshed which 

tion ; but while the stranger endeavoured to at first alarmed La Luc. Madame under- 

support her, his servaiU ran to fetch water. took to restore her niece in a few days, with 

Sne soon recovered, and unclosing her eyes, the assistance of a balsam composed by her- 

found herself in the arms of a chevalier, who self, on the villus oi yi\:i\Oci %V^ ^^^s^xtX^^ 



"4 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



with great eloquence, till interrupted by La 
TiUC, who reminded her of the condition of 
her patient. 

^ladalnc. Iiaving bathed Clara's bruises, 
and given liur a cordial of incomparable 
cfllaicy, left her. and Adeline watched in the 
chaml^r of her friend till she retired to her 
own for the night. 

La Luc, whose spirits had suffered much 
perturbation, was now tranquillised by the re- 
port his sister made of Clara. He intro- 
duced the stranger, and having mentioned 
the accident he had met with, desired that he 
might liave immediate assistance. Madame 
hastened to her closet, and it is perhaps dif- 
ficult to determine whether she felt most 
concern for the sufferings of her guest, or 
pleasure at the opportunity thus offered of 
displaying her physical skill. However this 
might be, she quitted the room with great 
alacrity, and very c^uickly returned with a 

Iihial containing her inestimable balsam ; and 
laving given the necessary direction for the 
application of it, slie left the stranger to the 
care of his servant. 

La Luc insisted that the chevalier, M. 
Verneuil, should not leave the chateau that 
night, and he very readily submitted to be 
detained. His manners during the evening 
were as frank and engaging as the hospitality 
and gratitude of La Luc were sincere, and 
they soon entered into interesting conver- 
sation. M. Verneuil conversed like a man 
who liad seen much and thought more ; 
and if he discovered any prejudice in his 
opinions, it was evidently the prejudice of a 
mind wlych, seeing objects through the 
medium of its own goodness, tinges them 
with the hue of its predominant quality. La 
Luc was much pleased, foe, in his retired 
situation, ho had not often an opportunity 
of receiving the pleasure which results from 
a communion of intelligent minds. He found 
that M. Verneuil had travelled. La Luc 
having asked sonic questions relative to Eng- 
land, they fell into discourse concerning the 
national characters of the French and En- 
glish. 

" If it is the privilege of wisdom," said M. 
Verneuil, " to look beyond happiness, I own 
I had rather be without it. When we observe 
the English, their laws, writings, and con- 
versation, and at the same time mark their 
countenances, manners, and the frequency of 
suicide among them, we are apt to believe that 
wisdom and happiness are incompatible. If, 
on the other hand, we turn to their neighbours 
the French, and see* their wretched policy, 
their sparlding but sophistical discourse, 
frivolous occupations, and withal, their gay 
animated air, we shall be compelled to ac- 
knowledge that happiness and folly too often 
dweU together." 

^^*iJiSSeiS»'^S^ *^ "^ ''^ ^^ ^ 



"It is the end of wisdom/' said La Luc, 
"to attain happiness, and I can hardly dUgni^ 
that conduct or course of thinkmg wluch 
tends to misery with the name of wisdom. 
By this rule, perhaps, the folly, as we term it, 
of the Frencn, deserves, since its eflfect is 
happiness, to be called ¥risdoim. That airy 
thoughtlessness, which seems alike to con- 
temn reflection and antidpation. produces all 
the effect of it, without reducing its subjects 
to the mortification of philosqphy." 

Discoursing on the variety of opinions 
that are daily formed on the same conduct, 
La Luc observed how much that which is 
commonly called opinion is the result of pas- 
sion and temper. 

" True," said M. Verneuil, "there i& a tone 
of thought, as there is a ke^-note in mosic, that 
leads all its weaker affections. Thus, where 
the powers of judging may he equal, the 
disposition to judge is different at dififerent 
times, and the actions of men are at least but 
too often arraigned by whim and caprice, by 
partial vanity, and the humour of tlie 
moment." 

Here La Luc took occasion to reprobate 
the conduct of those writers who, by snowing 
the dark side only of human nature, and by 
dwelling on the evils only which are inddent 
to humanity, have sought to degrade man in 
his own eyes, and to make him discontented 
with life. 

" What should we say of a painter," con- 
tinued La Luc, "who collected in Us piece 
objects of a black hue only, who presented 
you with a black man, a black horse, a bbuck 
dog. &c. &c., and tells you that his is a picture 
of nature, and that nature is black? TTs 
true, you would reply, the objects youeifaibit 
do exist in nature, but they form a very small 
part of her works. You say that nature ii 
black, and to prove it, you have collected oa 
your canvas all the animals of this hue that 
exist. But you have forgotten to paint the 
green earth, the blue sky, the white man, and 
objects of all these various hues with whidi 
creation abounds." 

The countenance of M. Verneuil lightened 
with peculiar animation during the discourse 
of La Luc. " To think weU of bis nature," 
said he, "is necessary to the dignity and to 
the happiness of man. There is a decent 
pride which becomes every mind, and is con- 
genial to virtue. That consciousness of 
innate dignity, which shows him the glory of 
his nature, will be his best protection from 
the meanness of vice. Where this consdous- 
ness is wanting," continued M. Verneuil, 
' ' there can be no sense of moral honour, and 
consequently none of the higher prindples of 
action. What can be expected of him who 
says that it is his nature to be mean and 
selfish? Or who can doubt that he who 
thinks thus, thinks fromf the experience of his 
QNm heart, from the tendency of his own 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



"5 



tions? Let it always be remembered, 
s who. would persuade men to be good 
to show them that they may be great." 
>a speak," said La Luc, "with the 
enthusiasm of a virtuous mind ; and, 
yiiig the impulse of your heart, you 
he truths of philosophy ,* and, trust 
3ad heart and a tnily philosophic head 
ever yet been united in the same in- 
il« 'Nncious inclinations not only cor- 
le heart, but the understanding, and 
ad to false reasoning. Virtue only is 
side of truth." 

Luc and his guest, mutually pleased 
ich other, entered upon the discussion 
iects so interesting to them both, that 
!ate before they parted for the night. 



CHAPTER XVn. 

ma such a scene as gave a kind relief 
> memory, in sweetly pensive grief. 

ViRciiL's Tom a. 
5 the breezy hill that skirts the down, 
a green grassy turf is all I crave, 
here and there a violet bcstrown, 
a brook or fountain's murmuring wave, 
■ny aa drening sun shine sweetly on my 
ve. The Minstrel. 

B had so much restored Clara, that 
Ldeline, anxious to know how she did, 
ariy in the morning to her chamber, 
ind her already risen and ready to 
the family at breakfast. M. Verneuil 
ed also, but his looks betrayed a 
>f rest, and indeed he had suffered, 
the night, a degree of anguish from 
n, which it was an effort of some 
on to endure in silence. It was now 
. and inflamed, and this might in 
l^ree be attributed to the effect of 
le La Luc's balsam, wliose restorative 
!S had for once failed. The whole 
sympathised with his sufferings, and 
oe, at the request of M. Verneuil, 
med her balsam, and substituted an 
int fomentation. 

a an application of this he, in a short 
found an abatement of the pain, and 
id to the breakfast-table with greater 
sure. The happiness which La Luc 
seeing his daughter in safety was very 
nt, but the warmth of his gratitude 
s her preserver he found it difficult to 
;. Clara spoke the genuine emotions 
heart, with artless but modest energy, 
tified sincere concern for the sufferings 
ihe had occasioned M. Verneuil. 
pleasure received from the company 
euest, and the consideration of the 
u service he had rendered him, co- 
jd with the natural hospitality of La 
ad he pressed M. Verneuil to remain 
me at the ch&teau. 



" I can never repay the service you have 
done me," said Li I^uc ; "yet I seek to 
increase my obligations to you by requesting 
you will prolong your visit, and thus allow 
me an opportunity of cultivating your 
acquaintance." 

M. Verneuil, who at the time he met \jx 
Luc was travelling from Geneva to a distant 
part of Savoy, merely for the purpose of 
viewing the country, being now delighted 
with his host, and with everything around 
him, ^lillingly accepted the mvitation. In 
this circumstance prudence concurred with 
inclination ; for to have pursued his journey 
on horseback, in his present situation, would 
have been dangerous, if not impracticable. 

The morning was spent in conversation, in 
which M. Verneuil displayed a mind enriched 
with taste, enlightened bv science, and en- 
larged by obsers-ation. The situation of the 
chd.teau, and the features of the surrounding 
scenery, charmed him, and in the evening he 
found himself able to walk with La Luc, and 
explore the beauties of this romantic region. 
As they passed through the village, the salu- 
tations of the peasants, in whom love and 
respect were equally blended, and their eager 
inquiries after Clara, bore testimony to the 
character of La Luc, while his countenance 
expressed a serene satisfaction, arising from 
the consciousness of deserving and possessing 
their love. 

"I live surrounded by my children," said 
he, turning to M. Verneuil, who had noticed 
their eagerness, "for such I consider my 
parishioners. In discharging the duties of 
my office I am repaid, not only by my own 
conscience, but by their |^alitude. There is a 
luxury in observing their simple and honest love, 
which I would not exchange for anything the 
world calls blessings." 

"Yet the world, sir, would call the pleasures 
of which you speak romantic," said M. Ver- 
neuil, "for to be sensible of this pure and 
exquisite delight requires a heart untainted 
with the vicious pleasures of society — pleasures * 
that deaden its finest feelings, and poison the 
source of its truest enjoyments." 

They pursued their way along the borders 
of the lake, sometimes under the shade of 
hanging woods, and sometimes over hillocks 
of turfs, where the scene opened in all its 
wild magnificence. M. Verneuil often stopped 
in raptures to observe and point out the 
singuUr beauties it exhibited, while La Luc, 
pleased with the delight his friend expressed, 
surveyed with more than usual satisfaction 
the objects which had so often charmed him 
before. But there was a tender melancholy 
in the tone of his voice and his countenance, 
which arose from the recollection of having 
often traced these scenes, and partaken of the 
pleasure they inspired, with her who had long 
since bade them an eternal farewell. 

They presently qvd,tXtdX\v%^^^i;.<^t «[A»m\!A.- 



ii6 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

m^ up a steep ascent between the woods, lost amidst the dissipation of general sodety. 

came, after an hour's walk, to a green sum- I have cherished in my heart the reroembtanoe 

mit, which ai)pcared, among the savage rocks of a woman whose virtues claimed all my 

that environed it. like the blossom on the love; I have cherished it as a treasure to 

thorn. It was a spot formed for solitary which I could withdraw from temporazy cares 

delight, inspiring that soothing tenderness so and vexations, in the certainty of findiog a 

dear to the feeling mind, and which calls soothing, though melancholy, comfort." 

back to memory the images of past regret, Ia Luc paused. M. Vemeuil expressed 

softened by distance, and endeared by fre- the sympathy he felt, but he knew the sacred- 

quent recollection. Wild shrubs grew from ness of sorrow, and soon relapsed into silence. 

the crevices of the rocks beneath, and the "One of the brightest hopes of a ^ture 

high trees of pine and cedar that waved above state," resumed La Luc, *'is, that we siiall 

afforded a melancholy and romantic shade, meet again those whom we have loved upon 

The silence of the scene was interrupted only earth. And perhaps our happiness may be 

by the breeze as it rolled over the woods, and permitted to consist very much in the society 

by the solitary notes of the birds that inhabited of our friends, purified from the frailties of 

the cliffs. mortality, with the finer affections more 

From this point the eye commanded an en- sweetly attuned, and with the &culties of 
tire view of those majestic and sublime Alps, mind infinitely more elevated and enlarged, 
whose aspect fills the soul with emotions of We shall then be enabled to comprehend 
indescribable awe, and seems to lift it to a subjects which are too \'ast for human con- 
nobler nature. The village and chateau of ception ; to comprehend, perhaps, the subli- 
La Luc appeared in the bosom of the moun- mity of that Deity who first called us into 
tains, a peaceful retreat from the storms that being. These views of futiuity, my friend, 
gathered on their tops. All the faculties of elevate us above the evils of this world, and 
M. Vemeuil were absorbed in admiration, seem to communicate to us a portion of the 
and he was for some time quite silent ; at nature we contemplate, 
length, bursting into a rhapsody, he turned, " Call them not the illusions of a vlsionanr 
and would have addressed La Luc, when he brain," proceeded La Luc ; •* I trust in their 
perceived him at a distance, leaning against a reality. Of this I am certain, that, whether 
rustic urn, over which drooped in beautiful they are illusions or not, a faith in them 
luxuriance the weeping birch. ought to be cherished for the comfort it 

As he approached, La Luc quitted his brings to the heart, and reverenced for the 

position and advanced to meet him, while dignity it imparts to the mind. Such feeUngs 

M. Vemeuil inquired upon what occasion the make a happy and important part of our 

urn had been erected. La Luc, unable to belief in a future existence ; they give energy 

answer, pointed to it, and walked silently to virtue and stability to principle. 

away, and M. Vemeuil, approaching the lu^n, "This," said M. Vemeuii, "is what I 

read the following inscription : have often felt, and what every ingmuoOB 

mind must acknowledge." 

"^^ La Luc and M. Vemeuil continued in con- 

THE MEMORY OF CLARA LA LUC, versation till the sun had left the scene. The 

THiq TTRN mountains, darkened by twilight, assumed a 

irtis LKJN sublimer aspect ; while the tops of some of 

IS ERECTED ON THE SPOT WHICH SHE LOVED, thc highest Alps wcrc yct Ulumined by the 

IN TESTIMONY OF THE AFFECTION OF suu's mys, and formcd a striking contrast to 

A HUSBAND. ^^^<^ shadowy obscurity of the world below. 

As they descended through the woods, and 

M. Vemeuil now comprehended the whole, traversed the margin of the lake, the stillness 

and feeling for his friend, was hurt that he and solemnity of the hour diflfuscd a pensi\-e 

had not noticed this monument of his grief, sweetness over their minds and sunk them 

He rejoined La Luc, who was standing on tlie into silence. 

point of the eminence, contemplating the They lound supper spread, as was usual, in 
landscape below with an air more placid, and the hall, of which the windows opened upon 
touched with the sweetness of piety and a garden, where the flowers might be said 
resignation. He perceived that M. Vemeuil to yield their fragrance in gratitude to the 
was somewhat disconcerted, and he sought to refreshing dews. The windows were em- 
remove his uneasiness. bowered with eglantine and other sweet 

"You will consider it," said he, "as a shrubs, which hung in wild luxuriance around, 

mark of my esteem, that I have brought you and formed a beautiful and simple decora- 

to this spot. It is never profaned by the tion. Ckira and Adehne loved to pass the 

presence of the unfeeling. They would deride evenings in this hall, where they had acquired 

the faithfulness of an attachment which has the first mdiments of astronomy, and from 

so long survived its object, and which, in which they had a wide view of the heavens. 

tbeir own breasts, would quickly have "been "La li\iG ^gVax^i^ omx. xq \Sasxa the planets and 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



"7 



the fixed stars, explained their laws, and from 
thence — taking occasion to mingle moral with 
scientific instruction — would often ascend to- 
wards that great First Cause ^ whose nature 
soars beyond the grasp of human comprehen- 
sion. 

' • No study," he would sometimes say, ' ' so 
much cnlaig^es the mind, or impresses it with 
so sublime an idea of the Deity, as that of 
astronomy. When the imagination launches 
into the r^ons of space, and contemplates 
the innumerable worlds which are scattered 
through it, we are lost in astonishment and 
awe. This globe appears as a mass of atoms 
in the immensity of the universe, and man a 
mere insect. Yet how wonderful that man, 
whose frame is so diminutive in the scale of 
beings, should have powers which spurn the 
narrow boundaries of time and space, soar 
beyond the sphere of his existence, penetrate 
the secret laws of nature, and calculate their 
progressive effects 1 Oh, how expressively 
does this prove the spirituality of our being 1 
Let the materialist consider it, and blush tliat 
he ever doubted." 

In this hall the whole family now met at 
supper ; and during the remainder of the 
evening the conversation turned upon general 
subjects, in which Clara joined in modest and 
judicious remark. La Luc had taught her to 
familiarise her mind to reasoning, and had 
accustomed her to deliver her sentiments 
freely. She spoke them with a simplicity 
extremely engaging, and which convinced her 
hearers that the love of knowledge, not the 
vanity of talking, induced her to converse. 
M. Vemeuil evidently endeavoured to draw 
forth her sentiments ; and Clam, interested 
by the subjects he introduced, a stranger to 
affectation, and pleased with the opinions he 
expressed, answered them with frankness and 
animation. They retired mutually pleased 
with each other. 

M. Vemeuil was about six- and -thirty, his 
figure manly, his countenance frank and 
engaging. A quick penetrating eye, whose 
fire was softened by benevolence, disclosed 
the chief traits of his character ; he was quick 
to discern, but generous to excuse, the follies 
of mankind ; and while no one more sensibly 
felt an injury, none more readily accepted the 
concession of an enemy. 

He was by birth a Frenchman. A fortune 
lately devolved to him had enabled him to 
eifficute a plan which his active and inquisi- 
tive mind had suggested, of viewing the most 
remarkable parts of the continent of Europe. 
He was peculiarly susceptible of the beautiful 
and sublime in nature. To such a taste 
Switzerland and the adjacent country was, of 
all others, the most interesting; and he found 
the scenery it exhibited infinitely surpassing 
all that his glowing imagination had formed ; 
he saw with the eye of a painter, and felt 
with the raptiure of a poet. 



In the habitation of I>a Luc he met with 
the hospitality, the frankness, and tin* tim- 
plicity so characteristic of the coimtry. In 
his venerable host he saw the strength of 
philosophy united with the finest tenderness 
of humanity — a philosophy which tau^^ht him 
to correct his feelings, not to aniiiliilate thcni; 
in Clara, the bloom of l)cnuty with the most 
perfect sinii)licity of heart ; and in Adeline, 
all the charms of elegance and gracr, with a 
genius deserving of the highest cuitup-. In 
this family picture the goodness of Madame 
\a Luc was not unperceivcd or forgoltrn. 
The cheerfulness and harmony that nigncd 
within the chAtcau was delightful ; but th« 
pliilanthrupy which, flowing from the heart 
of the pastor, was diffused throtigh the whole 
village, and united the inhabitants in the 
sweet and firm bonds of social compact, was 
divine. The beauty of its situation eonspired 
with these circumstances to make Ix'leiicourt 
seem almost a paradise. M. Vemeuil sij^ln-d 
that he must so soon quit it. "I ought to 
seek no farther," said he, " for here wisdom 
and happiness dwell together." 

The admiration was reciprocid ; I^a Luc 
and his family found themselves much in- 
terested in M. Vemeuil, and looked forward 
to the time of his departure with regret. .So 
warmly they pressed him to prolong his 
visit, and so powerfully his own inclinations 
secondecf theirs, that he accepted the invita- 
tion. La Luc omitted no circumstance 
which might contribute to the amusement of 
his guest, who having in a few days recovered 
the use of his arm, thev made several cxcur- 
sions among the mountains. Adeline and 
Clara, whom the care of Madame had 
restored to her usual health, were generally 
of the party. 

After spending a week at the chateau, M. 
Vemeuil bade adieu to I^ Luc and his 
family ; they parted with mutual regret, and 
the former promised that when he returned to 
Geneva, he would take Lelencourt in his way. 
As he said this, Adeline, who had for some 
time observed with much alarm La Luc's 
declining health, looked mournfully on his 
languid countenance, and uttered a secret 
prayer that he might live to receive the visit 
of M. Vemeuil. 

Madame was the only person who did not 
lament his departure ; she saw that the efforts 
of her brother to entertain his guest W(Te 
more than his present state of health would 
admit of, and she rejoiced in the quiet that 
would now return to him. 

But this quiet brought La Luc no respite 
from illness ; the fatigue he had suffered in 
his late exertions seemed to have increased 
his disorder, which in a short time assinned 
the aspect of a consumption. Yielding to 
the solicitations of his family, he went to 
Geneva for advice, and was there recom- 
mended to try iVve ?Jff ol "^vce. 



ii8 



THE ROMANCE OP THE POREST. 



The journey thither, however, was of con- 
siderable length, and believing his life to be 
very precarious, he hesitated whether to %o. 
He was also unwilling to leave the duty of his 
parish unperformed for so long a tinte as his 
nealth might require ; but this was an objec- 
tion which would not have withheld him 
from Nice, had his faith in the climate been 
equal to that of his physicians. 

His parishioners felt the life of their pastor 
to be of the utmost consecjuence to them. 
It was a general cause, and they testified at 
once his worth, and their sense of it, by 
going in a body to solicit him to leave them. 
He was much affected by this instance of 
their attachment. Such a proof of regard, 
conjoined with the entreaties of his own 
family, and a consideration that for their 
sakes it was a duty to endeavour to prolong 
his life, was too powerful to be withstood, 
and he determined to set out for Italy. 

It was settled that CUira and Adeline, 
whose healths La Luc thought required 
change of air and scene, should accompany 
him, attended by the faithful Peter. 

On the morning of his departure, a large 
body of his parishioners assembled round 
the door to bid him farewell. It was an 
affecting scene ; they might meet no more. 
At length, wiping the tears from his eyes. 
La Luc said, "Let us trust in God, my 
friends ; he has power to heal all disorders, 
both of body and mind. We shall meet 
again ; if not in this world, I hope in a 
better. Let our conduct be such as to ensure 
that better." 

The sobs of his people prevented any 
reply. There was scarcely a dry eye in the 
village ; for there was scarcely an inhabitant 
of it that was not now assembled in the 
presence of La Luc. He shook hands with 
them all. "Farewell, my friends," said he, 
" we shall meet again." 

"God grant we may ! " said they, with one 
voice of fervent petition. 

Having mounted his horse, and Clara and 
Adeline being ready, they took a last leave of 
Madame La Luc, and cj[iiittcd the chAteau. 
The people being unwilling to leave La Luc, 
the greater part of them accompanied him to 
some distance from the village. As he moved 
slowly on, he cast a last lingering look at his 
little home, where he had spent so many 
peaceful years, and which he now gazed on, 
perhaps, for the last time, and tears rose in 
his eyes ; but he checked them. Every scene 
of the adjacent country called up, as he 
passed, some tender remembrance. He 
looked towards the spot consecrated to the 
memory of his deceased wife ; the dewy 
vapours of the morning veiled it. La Luc 
felt the disappointment more deeply, perhaps, 
than reason could justify ; but those who 
know from experience how much the imagi- 
natioa loves to dwell on any object, howevex 



remotelj ooimected with that of our tender^ 
ness, will fed with him. This was an object 
round which the affections of La Luc nad 
settled themselves ; it was a memorial to the 
eye, and the view of it awakened vaxxt 
forcibly in the mind every tender idea that 
could associate with the primary subject of 
his r^fard. In such cases fancy gives to the 
i]lusk>ns of strong affiection tlie stamp of 
reality, and they are cherished by the heart 
with romantic fondness. 

His people accompanied him for nearlv a 
mile from the village, and could scarcely then 
be prevailed on to leave him ; at length he 
once more bade them farewell, and went on 
his way, followed by their piayera and bles- 
sings. 

1^1 Luc and his little party travelled slowly 
on, sunk in pensive silence — a silence too 
pleasingly sad to be soon rdinqnisbed, and 
which they indulged vrithout fear of interrup- 
tion. The solitary grandeur of the scenes 
through which they passed, and the sootbine 
murmur of the pines that waved above, aided 
this soft luxury of meditation. 

They proceeded -by easy stages, and after 
travelling for some days among the romantic 
mountains and pastoral valleys of Piedmont, 
they entered the rich country of Nice. The 
gay and luxuriant views whidi maw opened 
upon the travellers as they wotmd amopg the 
hills appeared like scenes of faiiy enchant- 
ment, or those produced by the lovdy visions 
of the poets. While the spiral summits of 
the mountains exhibited the snowy severity 
of winter, the pine, the cypress, the •lir^ 
and the m3rrtle shaded their sides with the 
green tints of spring, and groves of onuigi^ 
lemon, and citron spread over their feet the 
full glow of autumn. 

As they advanced the scenery became still 
more diversified, and at length, between the 
receding heights, Adeline caught a glimpse of 
the distant waters of the Mediterranean fading 
into the blue and cloudless horizon. She had 
never till now seen the ocean, and this tran- 
sient view of it roused her imagination, and 
made her watch impatiently for a nearer pros- 
pect. 

It was towards the close of day when the 
travellers, wnding roimd that range of Alps 
which crowns the amphitheatre that environs 
the city of Nice, looked down upon the green 
hills that stretch to the shores, on the city 
and its ancient castle, and on the wide waters 
of the Mediterranean, with the mountains of 
C:orsica in the farthest distance. Such a 
sweep of sea and land, so varied with the 
gay, the magnificent, and the awful, would 
have fixed any eye in admiration ; for Adeline 
and Clara, novelty and enthusiasm addeid 
their charms to the prospect. The soft and 
salubrious air seemed to welcome La Luc to 
this smiling region, and the serene atmosphere 
Vo ptoxn\^ 'mN9ana^\« ossiuner. 



The ROMANC& OP THE FOREST. 



li$ 



They at length descended upon the little 
plain where stands the city of Nice, and 
which was the most extensive piece of level 
ground they had passed since they entered 
the country. Here, in the bosom of the 
mountains, sheltered from the north and the 
east, whoe the western gales alone seemed 
to breathe, all the blooms of spring and the 
riches of autumn were united. Trees of 
myrtle bordered the road, which wound 
among groTes of orange, lemon, and berga- 
mot, whose delicious fragrance came to the 
sense nungled with the breath of roses and car- 
nations that blossomed in their shade. The 
gently-sweDing hills that rose from the plain 
were covered with vines, and crowned with 
cypresses and date-trees ; beyond, there ap- 
p^u%d a range of mountains, whence the 
travellers had descended, and whence flows 
the river Paglion, swollen by the snows that 
melt on their suitimits, and which, after mean- 
dering through the plain, washes the walls of 
Nice, where it falls into the Mediterranean. 
In this blooming region Adeline observed that 
the countenances of the peasants, meagre and 
discontented, formed a melancholy contrast 
to the face of the coimtry, and she lamented 
again the effects of an arbitrary government 
where the bounties of nature, which were 
designed for all, are monopolised by a few, 
and the many are suffered to starve, tanta- 
lised by surrounding plenty. 

The dty lost much of its enchantment on 
a nearer approach ; its narrow streets and 
shabby houses but ill answered the expecta- 
tion which a distant view of its ramparts 
and its harbour, gay with vessels, seemed to 
authorise. The appearance of the inn, at 
which La Luc now alighted, did not contri- 
bute to soften his disappointment ; but if he 
was surprised to find such indifferent accom- 
modation at the inn of a town celebrated as 
the resort of valetudinarians, he was still 
more so when he learned the difficulty of 
procuring furnished lodgings. 

After much search, he procured apartments 
in a small but pleasant chateau, situated a 
little way out of the town ; it had a garden, 
and a terrace which overlooked the sea, and 
was distinguished by an air of neatness very 
unusual in the houses of Nice. He agreed to 
board with the family, whose table likewise 
acconunodated a gentleman and lady, their 
lodgers, and thus he became a temporary in- 
habitant of this charming climate. 

On the following morning Adeline rose at 
an early hour, eager to indulge the new and 
sublime emotion with which a view of the 
ocean inspired her, and walked with Clara 
toward the hills that afforded a more exten- 
sive prospect. They pursued their way for 
some time between high embowering banks, 
till they arrived at an eminence, whence 

Heaven, earth, ocean smii'd i 



They sat do>vn on a point of rock, over- 
shadowed bv lofty palm-trees, to contcmpLite 
at leisure the magnificent scene. The sun 
was just emerged from the sea, over which 
his rays shed a flood of light, and darted a 
thousand brilliant tints on the vapours that 
ascended the horizon, and floated there in 
light clouds, leaving the bosom of the waters 
below clear as crystal, except where the whito 
surges were seen to beat ujion the rocks, and 
discovering the distant sails of the fishing-boats, 
and the far-distant highlands of Corsica, tinted 
with ethereal blue. CLira, after some time, drew 
forth her pencil, but threw it aside in despair. 
Adeline, as they returned home through a 
romantic glen, when hor senses were no longer 
absorbed in the contemplation of this grand 
scenery, and when its images floated on her 
memory only in softened colours, repeated 
the following lines : 

SUNRISE : A SONNET. 

Ofk let me wander, at the break of day. 

Thro' the cool vale o'erhung with waving woodt, 
Drink the rich fragrance of the budding May, 

And catch the murmur of the distant floods ; 
Or rest on the fresh bank of limpid rill, 

Where sleeps the vi'lct in the dewy shade. 
Where op'ning lilies balmy sweets distil. 

And the wild rausk-rose weeps along the glade ; 
Or climb the eastern cliff, whose airy head 

Hangs rudely o'er the blue and misty main ; 
Watch the fine^ hues of mom through ether sj^ead. 

And paint with roseate glow the crystal plain. 
Oh ! who can speak the rapture of the soul 

When o'er the waves the sun first steals to sight, 
And all the world of waters, as they roll^ 

And heaven's vast vault unveils m living light I 
So life's young hour to man enchanting smiles, 
With sparkling health, and joy, and fancy's fairy 
wiles ! 

La Luc, in his ^vftlks, met with some sen- 
sible and agreeable companions, who, like 
himself, came to Nice in search of health. Of 
these he soon formed a small but pleasant 
society, among whom was a Frenchman, 
whose mild manners, marked with a deep and 
interesting mdancholy, had particularly at- 
tracted La Luc. He very seldom mentioned 
himself or any circumstance that might lead 
to a knowledge of his family, but on other 
subjects conversed with frankness and much 
intelligence. La Luc had frequ«ntly invited 
him to his lodgings, but he had always declined 
the invitation! and this in a manner so gentle 
as to disarm displeasure, and convince La Luc 
that his refusal was the consequents of a cer- 
tain dejection of mTnd which made him reluc- 
tant to meet other strangers. 

The description which La Luc had given of 
this foreigner had excited the curiosity of 
Clara ; and the sympathy which the unfortu- 
nate feel for each other called forth the 
commiseration of Adeline ; for that he was 
unfortunate she could not doubt. On thek 
return from aa evemtv^ v^^XV. \a.YN5i\jwevVi.Ci. 



110 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



out the ClicN-alier, and quickened his pace 
to overtake him. Adeline was for a moment 
impelled to follow, but delicacy checked her 
steps ; she knew how painful the presence of 
a stranger often is to a wounded mind, and 
forbore to intrude herself on his notice, for 
the sake of only satisfying an idle curiosity. 
She turned therefore into another path ; but 
the delicacy which now prevented the meet- 
ing, accident in a few days defeated, and La 
Luc introduced the stranger. Adeline received 
him with a soft smile, but endeavoured to 
restrain the expression of pity which her 
features had involuntarily assumed ; she 
wished him not to know that she observed he 
was unhappy. 

After this interview he no longer rejected 
the invitations of I-a Luc, but made him 
frequent visits, and often accompanied Adeline 
and Clara in their rambles. The mild and 
sensible conversation of the former seemed to 
soothe his mind, and in her presence he fre- 
quently conversed with a degree of animation 
which La Luc till then had not observed in 
him. Adeline, too, derived from the similarity 
of their taste and his intelligent conversation, 
a degree of satisfaction which contributed, 
with the compassion his dejection inspired, 
to win her confidence, and she conversed 
with an easy frankness lather unusual to 
her. 

His visits soon became more frequent. He 
walked with La Luc and his family ; he at- 
tended them on their little excursions to view 
those magnificent remains of Roman antiquity 
which enrich the neighbourhood of Nice. 
When the ladies sat at home and worked, he 
enlivened the hours by reading to them, and 
they had the pleasure to observe his spirits 
somewhat relieved from the heavy melancholy 
that had oppressed him. 

M. Amand was passionately fond of music. 
Qara had not forgotten to bring her beloved 
lute ; he would sometimes strike the chords 
in the most sweet and mournful sym- 
phonies, but never could be prevailed on to 
play. 

When Adeline or Clara playe'd, he would sit 
in deep reverie, and lost to every object 
around him, except when he fixed his eyes 
in mournful gaze on Adeline, and a sigh 
would sometimes escape him. 

One evening Adeline, having excused her- 
self from accompanying La Luc and Clara 
in a visit to a neighbouring family, retired to 
the terrace of the garden which overlooked 
the sea, and as she viewed the tranquil splen- 
dour of the setting sun, and his glories re- 
flected on the polished surface of the waves, 
she touched the strings of the lute in softest 
harmony, her voice accompanying it with 
words which she had one day written, after 

^rirfc '^^^' ^^'^' ^^^^ effusion of Shak- 
g^res gemus, -a Midsummer Night's 



TITANIA TO HER LOVE. 

Oh ! fly with me through distant air 
To isles that gem the western deep 1 

For laughing Summer rerels there. 
And hangs her wreath on every ste^ 

As throuffh the green transparent sea 
Light floating on the waves we go^ 

The n^rmphs shall gaily welcome me^ 
Far in their coral caves below. 

For oft upon their margin sands. 

When twilight leads the fresh ning homib 
I come with sul my jocund bands 

To charm them from their sea-green bow^rb 

And n^ell they love our spoMts to view. 
And on the ocean's breast to lave ; 

And oft as we the dance renew. 
They call up music frcMn the wave. 

Swift hie we to that splendid dime^ 
Where gay Jamaica spreads her scene. 

Lifts the blue mountain — vdld— sublime I 
And smooths her vales of vivid green. 

Where throned high, in pomp of shade. 

The Power of Vegetation reigns, 
Expanding wide, o^r hill and glade, 

Shrubs of all growth— fruit of all stuns. 

She steals the sunbeam's fervid glow, 
To paint her flow'rs of mingling hue ; 

And o er the grape the purple throw. 
Breaking from verdant leaves to view. 

There myrtle bow'rs, and citron grove, 

O'ercanopy our airy dance ; 
And there the sea-breeze loves to rove. 

When trembles day's departing glanotb 

And when the false nuxm steals away. 
Or o'er the diasing mom doth rise. 

Oft, fearless, we our gambols play 
By the fire-worm's radiant eyes. 

And suck the honey'd reeds that swell 
In tufted plumes of silver white ; 

Or pierce the cocoa's milky cell. 
To sip the nectar of delight ! 

And when the shaking thunders roll. 
And lightnings strike athwart the gIo(HBp 

We shelter in the cedar's bole, 
And revel 'mid the rich perfume ! 

But chief we love beneath the palm. 
Or verdant plantain's spreading leaf. 

To hear, upon the midnight calm. 
Sweet Philomela pour her grief. 

To mortal sprite such dulcet sound. 
Such blissful hours, were never known ! 

Oh ! fly with me ray airy round, 
And I will make them all thine own ! 

•Adeline ceased to sing, when she immed 
atcly heard repeated in a low voice — 

To mortal sprite such dulcet sound. 
Such blissful hours, were never Imown ! 

and turning her eyes whence it came, si 
saw M. Amand. She blushed and laid dov 
the lute, which he instantly took up, an 
with a tremulous hand, drew forth tones 

That might create a soul under the ribs of Deati 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



121 



In a melodioas voice that trembled with sensi* 
bflity, he sang the following 

SONNET. 

How sweet Is Love's first gentle sway. 
When, crown'd with flow'rs, he softljr smiles I 
His hlue eyes fraueht with tesuful wiles, 
Wha« beams of tender transport play ; 
Hope leads him on his airy way, 
And Faith and Fancy still beguiles — 
Fsuth, quickly tangl»i in her toils- 
Fancy, wnose magic forms so ^ay 

The fwr deceiver's self deceive — 
How sweet is Love's first gentle sway ! 

Ne'er would that heart he bids to grieve 
From Sorrow's soft enchantments stray — 
Ne'er — till the god, exulting in his art, 
Relentless frowns, and wings th' envenom'd dart I 

M. Amand paused ; he seemed much op- 
pressed, and at length burst into tears, 
laid down the instrument, and walked abruptly 
away to the farther end of the terrace. 
Adeline, without seeming to observe his agi- 
tation, rose and leaned upon the wall, below 
which a group of fishermen were busily em- 

Sloyed in drawing a net. In a few moments 
e returned with a composed and softened 
countenance. 

'•Forgive this abrupt conduct," said he; 
•' I know not how to apologise for it but by 
owning its cause. When I tell you, madam, 
that my tears flow to the memory of a lady 
who strongly resembled you, and who is lost 
to me for ever, you will know how to pity 
me." 

His voice faltered, and he paused. Adeline 
was silent. 

•'The lute," he resumed, "was her fa- 
vourite instrument, and when you touched it 
with such melancholy expression, I saw her 
very image before me. But, alas ! why do 
I distress you with a knowledge of my 
sorrows ! she is gone, never to return ! And 

you, Adeline — you " He checked his 

speech, and Adeline, turning on him a look 
of mournful regard, observed a wildness in 
his eyes which alarmed her, 

•' These recollections are too painful," said 
she, in a gentle voice ; "let us return to the 
house ; M. La Luc is probably come home. " 

"Oh no !" replied M. Amand ; "no, this 
breeze refreshes me. How often at this 
hour have I talked with her, as I now talk 
with you ! Such were the soft tones of her 
voice — such the ineffable expression of her 
cotmtenance." 

Adeline interrupted him : " Let me beg of 
you to consider your health — this dewy air 
cannot be good for invalids." 

He stood with his hands clasped and 
seemed not to hear her. She took up the lute 
to go, and passed her fingers lightly over the 
chords. The sounds recalled his scattered 
senses ; he raised his eyes, and fixed them in 
long unsettled gaze upon hers. 



" Must I leave you here ?" said she smiling, 
and standing in an attitude to depart. 

•' I entreat you to play again the air I heard 
just now," said M. Amand, in a hurried voice. 

"Certainly ;" and she immediately began 
to play. He leaned against a palm-tree in 
an attitude of deep attention, and as the 
sounds languished on the air, his features 
gradually lost their wild expression, and he 
melted mto tears. He continued to weep 
silently till the song concluded, and it was 
some time before he recovered voice enough 
to say : 

"Adeline, I sincerely thank you for this 
goodness. My mind has recovered its bias ; 
you have soothed a broken heart. Increase 
tlie kindness you have shown me, by promis- 
ing never to mention what you have witnessed 
this evening, and I will endeavour never again 
to wound your sensibility by a similar offence." 

Adeline gave the required promise ; and 
M. Amand, pressing her hand, with a melan- 
choly smile, hurried from the garden, and she 
saw him no more that night. 

I-^ Luc had been nearly a fortnight at Nice, 
and his health, instead of amending, seemed 
rather to decline ; yet he wished to make a 
longer experiment of the climate. The air, 
which failed to restore her venerable friend, 
revived Adeline ; and the variety and novelty 
of the surrounding scenes amused her mind, 
though — since they could not obliterate the 
memory of the past or suppress the pang of 
present affliction— they were ineffectual to 
dissipate the sick languor of melancholy. 
Company, by compelling her to withdraw her 
attention from the subject of her sorrow, 
afforded her a transient relief, but the violence 
of the exertion generally left her more de- 
pressed. It was in the stillness of solitude, 
in the tranquil observance of beautiful nature, 
that her mind recovered its tone, and indulg- 
ing the pensive inclination now become 
habitual to it, was soothed and fortified. 
Of all the grand objects which nature had 
exhibited the ocean inspired her with the 
most sublime admiration. She loved to wan- 
der alone on its shores ; and, when she could 
escape so long from the duties or forms of 
society, she would sit for hours on the beach, 
watching the roUing waves and listening to 
their dying murmur, till her softened fancy 
recalled long-lost scenes and restored the 
image of Theodore, when tears of despon- 
dency too often followed those of pity and 
regret. But these visions of memory, painful 
as they were, no longer excited that frenzy 
of grief they formerly awoke in Savoy ; the 
sharpness of misery was passed, though its 
heavy influence was not, perhaps, less power- 
ful. To these solitary indulgences generally 
succeeded calmness, and what Adeline en- 
deavoured to believe was resignation. 

She usually rose early, and walked down to 
the shore to ervJoY, m XVva q:q^ ^xA i^^\*. 



122 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



hours of the morning, the cheering beauty of 
nature, and inhale the pure sea-breeze. Every 
object then smiled in fresh and lively colours. 
The blue sea, the brilliant sky, the distant 
fishing-boats with their white sails, and the 
voices of the fishermen borne at intervals on 
the air, were circumstances which reanimated 
her spirits ; and in one of her rambles, yield- 
ing to that taste for poetry which had seldom 
forsaken her, she repeated the following lines : 

MORNING ON THE SEA-SHORE. 

What print of fairy feet Ls here 
On Neptune's smooth and yellow sands ? 
What midnight revel's airy dance, 
Hencath the moonbeam's trembling glance, 
Has blest these shores ? What sprightlv bands 

Have chased the waves unchecked by fear ? 
Whoe'er they were, they fled from morn, 
For now, all silent and forlorn, 
These tide-forsaken sands appear : 
Return, sweet sprites, the scene to cheer I 

In vain the call ! Till moonlight's hour 
Ap^ain diffuse its softer power, 
litania, nor her fairy loves. 
Emerge from India's spicy groves. 

Then, when the shaa wy hour returns, 
When silence rei^s o'er air and earth. 

And ev'ry star m ether bums. 
They come to celebrate their mirth ; 

In frolic ringlet trip the ground. 
Bid music's voice on silence win, 

Till magic echoes answer round — 
Thus do their festive rites begin. 

Oh fairy forms ! so coy to mortal ken. 

Your mystic steps to poets only shown ; 
Oh ! lead me to the brook or hoflow'd glen. 
Retiring far, with winding wood o'ergrown ! 

Where'er ye best delight to rule ; 
If in some forest's lone retreat, 
Thither conduct my willing feet^ 

To the light brink of fountain cool. 
Where, sleeping in the midnight dew. 
Lie Sprin|f's young buds of ev'r^' hue. 

Yielding their sweet breath to the air. 
To fold their silken leaves from harm, 
And their chill heads in moonshine warm, 

Is bright Titania's tender care. 

There, to the night-bird's plaintive chaunt 
Your carols sweet ye love to raise. 
With oaten reed and past'ral lays ; 
And guard with forceful spell her haunt. 

Who, when your antic sports are done. 
Oft lulls ye in the lily's cell- 
Sweet flower ! that suits your slumbers well. 

And shields ye from the rising sun. 
When not to India's steeps ye fly 
After twilight and the moon. 
In honey-buds ye love to lie, 

While reigns supreme light's fervid noon, 
Nor quit the cell where peace pervades. 
Till night leads on the dews and shades. 

E'en now your scenes enchanted meet my sight ! 
I see the earth unclose, the palace rise, 

The high dome swell, and long arcades of light 
Glitter among the deep embow'ring woods, 
And glance reflecting from the trembling floods ! 

While to soft Jutes the portals wide unfold, 

And fairy forms of fine ethereal dyes 



Advance with frolic step and laughing evA 
Their hair with pearl, thflu* garments deck'd with 

gold; 
Pearls that in Neptune's briny waves they sought. 
And gold from India's deepest caverns farou^L 
Thus your light visions to my eyes nnvril. 
Ye sportive pleasures, sweet lUnsicm^ hsui 1 

But ah ! at mcNm's fint blxish again ye fade I 
So from jrouth's ardent gaze life's landicape gay. 

And forms in fancy's summer hues anay'd, 
Dissolve at once in air at Truth's resplendent day. 

During several days succeeding that on 
which M. Amand had disclosed the cansA of 
his melancholy, he did not visit La Luc. At 
length, Adeline met him in one of her solitaxy 
rambles on the shore. He was pale and dfr* 
jected and seemed much agitated when he 
observed her ; she therefore endeavoured to 
avoid him, but he advanced with quickened 
steps and accosted her. He sud it was his 
intention to leave Nice in a few days. "I 
have found no benefit from the climate," 
added M. Amand. " Alas ! what climate can 
relieve the sickness of the heart? I go to 
lose, in the variety of new scenes, the remem- 
bra lice of past happiness ; yet the effort is 
vain ; I am everywhere equally restless and 
unhappy." 

Adeline tried to encourage him to hopemuch 
from time and change of place. ' ' Time will 
blunt the sharpest edge of sorrow," said she ; 
" I know it from experience." Yet while she 
spoke, the tears in her eyes contradicted the 
assertion of her lips. 

"You have been unhappy, Adeline 1 Ye»— 
I knew it from the first. The smUe of pity 
which you gave me assured me that you 
knew what it \vas to suffer." The desponding 
air with which he spoke renewed her appre- 
hension of a scene similar to the one she oad 
lately witnessed, and she changed the subject, 
but he soon returned to it. ' ' You bid me heme 
much from time I My wife ! My dear wife I" 
— his tongue faltered — "it is now many 
months since I lost her, yet the moment (H 
her death seems but as yesterday." 

Adeline faintly smiled. " You can scarcely 
judge of the efifect of time yet ; you have much 
to hope for." 

He shook his head. " But I am again in- 
truding my misfortunes on your notice ; forgive 
this perpetual egotism. There is a comfort 
in the pity of the good, such as nothing else 
can impart, this must plead my excuse ; may 
you, Adeline, never want it. Ah I those 

tears " Adeline hastily dried them. M. 

Amand forbore to press the subject, and im- 
mediately began to converse on different 
topics. They returned towards the ch&teau, 
but La Luc being from home, M. Amand 
took leave at the door. Adeline retir^ to 
her chamber, oppressed by her own sorrows 
and those of her amiable friend. 

Nearly three weeks had now elapsed at Nice, 
during which the disorder of Ijsl Luc seemed 
raX^ver \.o "mcteas^i \}Qa.xv. \a ^b^\fi, when his 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



1^3 



phy^dan very honestly confessed the litUe 
hope he entertained from the climate, and 
advised him more to try the effect of a sea 
voyage, adding, that if the experiment failed, 
even the air df MontpcUier appeared to him 
more likely to afford relief than that of Nice. 
I^ Luc rece iv ed this disinterested advice with 
a mixture of gratitude and disappointment. 
The circumstances which had made him re- 
luctant to quit Savoy, rendered him more .so 
to protract his absence, and increase his 
expenses ; but the ties of affection that bound 
him to his fomily, and the love of life, which 
so seldom leaves us, again prevailed over 
inferior considerations, and he determined to 
coast the Mediterranean as far as Langiiedoc, 
where, if the voyage did not answer his ex- 
pectations, he would land and proceed to 
MontpeUier. 

When M. Amand learned that La Luc 
d?signed to quit Nice in a few days, he de- 
temnined not to leave it before him. During 
th's interval he had not sufficient resolution 
to deny himself the frequent conversation of 
Adeline, though her presence, by reminding 
him of his lost wife, gave him more pain than 
comfort. He was the second son of a French 
gentleman of family, and had been married 
about a year to a lady, to whom he had long 
been attached, when she died in her lying-in. 
The infant soon followed its mother, and 
left the disconsolate father abandoned to 

grief, whicdi had preyed so heavily on his 
eald), that his physician thought it necessary 
to send him to Nice. From the air of Nice, 
however, he had derived no benefit, and he 
now determined to travel farther into Italy, 
though he no longer felt any interest in those 
charming scenes, which in happier days, and 
with her whom he never ceased to lament, 
would have offered him the highest degree of 
mental luxury ; now, he sought only to escape 
from himself, or rather from the image of her 
who had once constituted his truest happiness. 
La Luc having laid his plan, hired a small 
vessel, and in a few days embarked with a 
sick hope, bidding adieu to the shores of 
Italy and the towering Alps, and seeking on 
a new element the health which had hitherto 
mocked his pursuit. 

M. Amand took a melancholy leave of his 
new friends, whom he attended to the sea- 
side. When he assisted Adeline on board, 
his heart was too full to suffer him to say 
ferewell ; but he stood long on the beach 
pursuing with his eyes her course over the 
waters, and waving his hand, till tears dim- 
med his sight. The breeze wafted the vessel 
gently from the coast, and Adeline saw her- 
self surrounded by the undulating waves of 
the ocean. The shore appeared to recede, 
its mountains to lessen, the gay colours of its 
landscape to melt into each other, and in a 
short time the figure of M. Amand was seen 
no more ; the town of Nice, with its castle and 



harbour, next faded away in distance, and the 
purple tint pf the mountains was at length all 
that remained on the verge of the horizon. 
She sighed as she gazed, and her eyes filled 
with tears. 

"So vanished my prospect of happiness," 
said she, "and my future view is like the 
waste of waters that surrounds me." 

IlfT heart was full, and she retired from 
ol)servatif)n to a n'mote jxirt of the deck, 
where she indulged her tears as she M-atchi'cl 
the vessel cut its way through the liquid glass. 
The water was .so transpiircnt that she saw 
the sunbeams playing at considerable di'pth, 
and fish of various colours glance atliwart the 
current. Innumerable marine plants spn-ad 
their vigorous leaves on the rrx'fcs In-low, and 
the richness of their verdure forincd a iK-au- 
tiful contrast to the glowing .suirlet of the 
coral that branched beside thcni. 

The distant coast, at length, entirely dis- 
app>eared. Adeline gazed with an emotion 
the most sublime on the boundless expanse 
of waters that spread on all sides ; she seemed 
as if launched into a new world — thegmndeur 
and immensity of the view astonished and 
overpowered her ; for a moment she doubted 
the truth of the compass, and believed it to 
be almost impossible for the vessel to find its 
way over the pathless waters to any shore. 
And when she considered that a plank alone 
sepamted her from death, a sensation of un- 
mixed terror superseded that of sublimity, 
and she hastily turned her eyes from the 
prospect, and her thoughts from the subject. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

Is there a heart that music cannot melt ? 

Alas ! how is that rugged heart forlorn ! 
Is there who ne'er that mystic transport felt, 
Of solitude and melancholy bom ? 
He need not woo the Muse— he is her scorn. 

Bbattib. 

Towards evening the captain, to avoid the 
danger of encountering a Barbary corsair, 
steered for the French coast, and Adeline 
distinguished in the gleam of the setting sun 
the shores of Provence, feathered with wood, 
and green with pasturage. La Luc, languid 
and ill, had retired to the cabin, whither 
Clara attended him. The pilot at the helm, 
guiding the tall vessel through the sounding 
waters, and one solitary sailor, leaning with 
crossed arms against the mast, and now and 
then singing parts of a mournful ditty, were 
all of the crew, except Adeline, that remained 
upon deck ; and Adeline silently watched the 
declining sun, which threw a saffron glow 
upon the waves and on the sails, gently 
swelling in the breeze that was now dying 
away. The sun, at length, sank below the 
ocean, and twilight stole over the scene, 
leaving the shadowy shores yet visible, and 
touching with a soVexrai XvoX. ^i!sv& \i;sx«^ ^^ 



124 



THE ROMAI^CE OF THE FOREST. 



stretched wide around. She sketched the 
picture, but it was witli a faint pencil. 

NIGHT. 

O'er the dim breast of Ocean's wave, 
Nij^ht spreads afar her gloomy win^, 
And pensive thought and silence brings, 
Save wncn the distant waters lave. 
Or when the mariner's lone voice 
Swells faintly in the passing gale, 

Or when the screaming sea-gulls poise 
O'er the tall mast and swelling sail. 
Bounding thegray gleam of the deep, 

Where fancied forms arouse the mhid, 
D irk sweep the shores, on whose rude steep 
Sighs the sad spirit of the wind. 
Sweet is its voice upon the air 
At ev'ning's melancholy close. 
When the smooth wave in silence flows ! 
• Sweet, sweet the peace its stealing accents bear I 
Blest be thy shades, O Night ! and blest the song 
Thy low wmds breathe the distant shores along ! 

As the shadows thickened, the scene sank 
into deeper repose. Kvcn the sailor's song 
had ceased ; no sound was licard but that 
of the waters dashing Ixineath the vessel, and 
their fainter murmur on the pebbly coast. 
Adeline's mind was in unison with the tran- 
quillity of the hour ; lulled by the waves,' she 
resigned herself to a still melancholy, and sat 
lost in reverie. The present moment brought 
to her recollection her voyage up the Rhone, 
when, seeking refuge from the terrors of the 
Marquis de Montalt, she so anxiously endea- 
voured to anticipate her future destiny. She 
then, as now, had watched the fall of evening 
and the fading prospect, and she remembered 
what a desolate feeling had accompanied the 
impressions which those objects made. She 
had then no friends — no asylum — no certainty 
of escaping the pursuit of her enemy. Now 
she had found affectionate friends, a secure 
retreat, and was delivered from the terrors 
she then suffered ; but still she was imhappy. 
The remembrance of Theodore — of Theodore 
who loved her so truly, who had encountered 
and suffered so much for her sake, and of 
whose fate she was now as ignorant as when 
she traversed tlie Rhone, was an incessant 
pang to her heart. She seemed to he more 
remote than ever from the possibility of 
hearing of him. Sometimes a faint lioi.^ 
crossed her that he had escaped the malice 
of his persecutor ; but when she considered 
the inveteracy and power of the latter, and 
the heinous light in which the law regards an 
assault upon a superior officer, even this poor 
hope vanished, and left her to tears and 
anguish, such as this reverie, which began 
with a sensation of only gentle melancholy, 
now led to. She continued to muse till 
the moon arose from the bosom of the ocean, 
and shed her trembling lustre upon the 
waves, diffusing peace, and making silence 
more solemn ; beaming a soft light on the 
white sails, and throwing upon the waters 
tne long shadow of the vessel, winch novf 



seemed to glide away unopposed by any 
current. Her tears had somewhat rdieved 
the anguish of her mind, and she again re- 
posed in placid melancholy, when a strain of 
such tender and entrancing sweetness stole on 
the silence of the hour, that it seemed more 
like celestial than mortal music — so soft, so 
soothing, it sank upon her ear, that it re* 
called her from misery to hope and love. 
She wei)t again— but these were tears which 
she would not have exchanged for mirth and 
joy. She looked roimd, but perceived ndther 
ship nor boat ; and as the undulating sounds 
swelled on the distant air, she thoi^t they 
came from the shore. Sometimes the breeze 
wafted them away, and again returned them 
in tones of the most languishing softness. 
The links of the air thus broken, it was 
music rather than melody that she caught, 
till, the pilot gradually steering nearer the 
coast, she distinguished the notes of a song 
familiar to her ear. She endeavoured to 
recollect where she had heard it, but in vain ; 
yet her heart beat almost unconsciously with 
a something resembling hope. SUU she 
listened, till the breeze again stole the sounds. 
With regret she now perceived that the vessel 
was moving from them, and at length 
they trembled faintly on the waves, seuik 
away at a distance, and were heard no more. 
She remained upon deck a considerable time, 
unwilling to rehnquish the expectation of 
hearing them again, and their sweetness still 
vibrating on her fancy, and at length retired 
to the cabin, oppressed by a degree of ^sap- 
pointment which the occasion did not appnr 
to justify. 

La Luc grew better during the voyage, his 
spirits revived, and when the vessel entered 
that part of the Mediterranean called the 
Gulf of I^yons, he was sufficiently anim^ed 
to enjoy from the deck the noble prospect 
which the sweeping shores of P*rovence, ter- 
minating in the far-distant ones of Langne- 
doc, excited, 

Adeline and Clara, who anxiously watched 
his looks, rejoiced in their amendment ; and 
the fond wishes of the latter already antici- 
pated his perfect recovery. Disappointment 
had too often checked the expectations of 
Adeline, to permit her now to indulge an 
equal degree of hope with that of her friend, 
yet she jconfided much in the effect of this 
voyage. 

La Luc amused himself at intervals with 
discoursing, and pointing out the situations 
of considerable ports on the coast, and the 
mouths of rivers that after wandering through 
Provence, disembogue themselves into the 
Mediterranean. The Rhone, however, was 
the only one of much consequence which he 
passed. On this object, though it was so 
distant, that fancy, perhaps, rather than the 
sense, beheld it, Clara gazed with peculiar 
p\eas\jic, lor it came from the banks of 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



"5 



Savoy ; and the wave which she thouglit she 
perceived had washed the feet of her clear 
native mountains. The time passed with 
mingled pleasure and improvement, as I«i 
Luc described to his attentive pupils tlie 
manners and commerce of the different in- 
habitants of the coast, and the natural 
Yi\%\orf of the country ; or as he tmccd in 
imagination the remote wanderings of rivers 
to thor source, and delineated the character- 
istic beauties of their scener>'. 

After a pleasing voyage of a few days, the 

shores of Provence receded, and that of 

L^nguedoc, which had long bounded the 

distance, became the grand object of the 

scene, and the sailors drew near tlieir p>ort. 

They landed in the afternoon at a small town 

situated at the foot of a woody eminence, on 

the right overlooking the sea, and on the left 

the ndi plains of Languedoc, gay with the 

purple vine. La Luc determined to defer his 

journey till the following day, and was 

directed to a small inn at the extremity of 

the town, the accommodation of which, such as 

it was, he endeavoured to be contented with. 

In the evening, the beauty of the hour, anci 

the desire of exploring new scenes, invited 

Adeline to walk. La Luc was fatigued, and 

did not go out, and Clara remained with 

him. Adeline took her way to the woods 

that rose from the margin of the sea, and 

climbed the wild eminence on which they 

hung. Often as she went she turned her 

eyes to catch between the dark foliage the 

blue waters of the bay, the white sails that 

flitted by, and the trembling gleam of the 

setting sun. 

When she reached the summit, and looked 
down over the dark tops of the woods on the 
\^de and various prospect, she was seized 
with a kind of still rapture impossible to be 
expressed, and stood unconscious of the flight 
of time till the sun had left the scene, and 
twilight threw its solemn shade upon the 
mountsdns. The sea alone reflected the 
fading splendour of the west ; its tranquil 
surface was partially disturbed by the low 
wind that crept in tremulous lines along the 
waters, whence, rising to the woods, it 
shivered their light leaves, and died away. 
Adeline, resigning herself to the luxury of 
sweet and tender emotions, repeated the fol- 
lowing lines : 

SUNSET. 

Sof^ o'er the mountain's purple brow 
Meek twilight draws her shadows gray ; 

From tufled woods and vallum's low 
Light's magic colours steal away. 

Yet still, amid the spreading; gloom, 
Resplendent glow the western waves 
That roll o'er Neptune's coral caves— 

A zone of light on evening's dome. 

On this lone summit let me rest, 
And view the forms to fancy dear, 

Till on the ocean's dorkexted Sreast 



Tlie Ntars of ev'ning tremble clear ; 

Or the moon's pale orb appcir. 

Throwing her fine of rncliainc wide, 

Far o'er die lightly-curling tide 

Th:it seeniK the yellow sands to chide. 
No sounds o'er silence now prevail 

Save of the dying wave Ijelow, 
Or sailor's song l»me on the gale, 

Or oar at distance striking slow. 
5)0 sweet ! so tranquil I may my cv'ning's ray 
Set to tills world, and rise in future day. 

Adeline quitted the heights, and followed a 
narrow path that wound to the beach below ; 
her mind was now particularly sensil)Ie to fine 
impressions, and the sweet notes of the night- 
ingale amid the stillness of the woods agsiin 
awakened her enthusiasm. 

TO THE NIGHTINGALE. 

Child of the melancholy song ! 
Oh, yet that tender strain prolong ! 

Her lengthened shade when ev'ning slings. 

From mountain-clifTs and forests green, 
And sailing slow on silent winj^s. 

Along the glimm'ring West is seen ; 
I love o'er pathlesii hills to stray. 

Or trace the winding vale remote, 
And pause, sweet bird ! to hear thy lay 

While moonbeams on the thin clouds float, 
l^ill o'er the mountain's dewy head 
Pale midnight steals to wake the dead. 

Far through the heav'n's ethereal blue 
Wafted on Spring's light airs you come. 

With blooms, and flowers, and genial dew, 
From climes where Summer joys to roam, 
Oh, welcome to your long-lost home ! 

Child of the melancholy song ! 

Who lov'st the lonely woodland-glade 
To mourn unseen the boughs among. 

When twilight spreads her pensive shade. 
Again thy dulcet voice I hail ! 

Oh, pour again the li<}uid note 
That dies upon the ev'nmg gale ! 
For fancy loves the kindred tone. 
Her griefs the plaintive accents own. 

She loves to near thy music float 
At solemn midnight's stillest hour. 

And think on ^ends for ever lost. 

On joys by disappointment crost, 
And weep anew love's charmful power. 

I'hen memory wakes the magic smile, 

Th' impassioned voice, the melting eye. 
That wont the trusting heart beguile. 

And wakes again the hopeless sigh I 
Her skill the elowing tints revive 

Of scenes that time had bade decay ; 
She bids the softened passions live — 

The passions urge again their sway. 
Yet o'er the long-regretted scene 

Thy song the grace of sorrow throwt— 
A melancholy charm serene, 

More rare than all that mirth bestows. 
Then hail, sweet bird ! and hail thy pensive tear ! 
To taste, to fancy, and to virtue dear ! 

The spreading dusk at length reminded 
Adeline of her distance from the inn, and 
that she had her way to find through a wild 
and lonely wood ; she bade adieu ta ^.^x't 

siren thai ba^ sq \qii^ ^<^\a:\Sk<^ V<^x^ ^sA 



126 THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 

fmrsucd the path with quick steps. Having change his route and accompaoiy him to the 

allowed it for some time, she became bewiU shores of the Mediterranean, lliey had em- 

dercd among the thickets, and the increasing barked from the coast of Provence only a few 

darkness did not allow her to judge of the preceding days, and had that evening landed 

direction she was in. Her apprehensions m Languedoc, on the estate of M. Mauron. 

heightened her difficulties ; she thought she Adeline had now no doubt that it was the 

distinguished the voices of men at some little flute of M. Vemeuil, and which had so often 

distance, and she increased her speed till she delighted her at Lelencourt, that she had 

found herself on the sea sands, over which heard on the sea. 

the woods impended. When they reached the inn they found La 
Her breath was now exhausted ; she paused Luc under great anxiety for Addine, in search 
a moment to recover herself, and fearfully of whom he had sent several people. Anxiety 
listened, but, instead of the voices of men, yielded to surprise and pleasure when be per- 
she heard faintly swelling in the breeze the ceived her with M. Vemeuil, whose eyes 
notes of mournful music. Her heart, ever beamed with unusual animation on seeing 
sensible to the impressions of melody, melted Clara. After mutual congratulations, M. Ver- 
with the tones, and her fears were for a neuil observed, and lamented, the veiy indif- 
moment lulled in sweet enchantment. Sur- ferent accommodation which the inn anorded 
prise was soon mingled with delight, when, his friends, and M. Mauron immediateily in- 
as the sounds advanced, she distinguished vited them to his ch&teau, with a warmth of 
the tone of that instrument, and the melody hospitality that overcame every scruple which 
of that well-known air, she had heard a few delicacy or pride could oppose. Tlie woods 
preceding evenings from the shores of Pro- that Adeline had traversed formed a part of his 
vence. But she had no time for conjecture— demesne, which extended almost to the inn ; 
footsteps approached, and she renewed her but he insisted that his carriage should take 
speed. his guests to the ch&teau, and departed to 
She was now emerged from the darkness of give orders for their reception. The presence 
the woods, and the moon, which shone bright, of M. Vemeuil, and the kindness of his friend, 
exhibited along the level sands the town and gave to La Luc an unusual flow of spirits ; he 
port in the distance. The steps that had conversed with a degree of vigour and livdi- 
followed now came up ^vith her, and she per- ness to which he had long been unaccustomed, 
ceived two men, but they passed in conversa- and the smile of satisfaction that Gara gave 
tion without noticing her, and as they jjassed to Adeline expressed how much she thought 
she was certain she recollected the voice of he was already benefited by the voyage. Ade- 
him who was then speaking. Its tones were line answered her look with a smile of less 
so familiar to her ear that she was surprised confidence, for she attributed his present ani- 
at the imperfect memory which did not suffer mation to a more temporary cause. 
her to be assured by whom they were uttered. About half an hour after the departure of 
Another step now followed, and a rude voice M. Mauron a boy, who sen'ed as waiter, 
called to her to stop. As she hastily turned brought a message from a chevalier then at 
her eyes, she saw imperfectly by the moon- the inn, requesting permission to speak with 
light a man in a sailor's habit pursuing, while Adeline. The man who had pursued her 
he renewed the call. Impelled by terror, she along the sands instantly occurred to her, and 
fled along the sands, but her steps were short she scarcely doubted that the stranger was 
and trembling, those of her pursuer's strong some person belonging to the Marquis de 
and quick. Montalt. perhaps the Marquis himself, though 
She had just strength sufficient to reach the that he should have discovered her accident- 
men who had before passed her, and to im- ally, in so obscure a place, and so imnoediatdy 
plore their protection, when her pursuer came upon her arrival, seemed very improbable. 
up with them, but suddenly turned into the With trembling lips, and a countenance pale 
woods on the left and disappeared. as death, she inquired the name of the cheva- 
She had no breath to answer the inquiries Her. The boy was not acquainted with it. 
of the strangers who supported her, till a La Luc asked what sort of a person he was, 
sudden exclamation, and the sound of her but the boy, who understood little of the art 
own name, drew her eyes attentively upon of describing, gave such a confused account 
the person who uttered them, and in the rays of him, that Adeline could only learn he was 
which shone strong upon his features, she not large, but of the middle statute. This 
distinguished M. Vemeuil ! Mutual satisfac- circumstance, however, convincing her it was 
tion and explanation ensued, and when he not the Marquis de Montalt who desired to 
learned that La Luc and his daughter were see her, she asked whether it woidd be agree- 
at the inn, he felt an increased pleasure in able to La Luc to have the stranger admitted ? 
conducting her thither. He said that he had La Luc said, " By all means 1 " and the waiter 
accidentally met with an old friend in Savoy, withdrew. 

whom he now introduced by the name of Adeline sat in trembling expectation till the 

Mauron, and who had prevailed on bim \o dooi o^uedi 9Xid Louis de la Motte entered 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



127 



the room. He advanced with an embarrassed 
and melancholy air. though his countenance 
had been enlightened with a momentary 
pleasure when he first beheld Adeline — ^.Vde- 
line, who was still tlic idol of his heart. 
After the first salutations were over, all 
apprehensions of the Marquis being now dis* 
sipated, she inauired when Louis had seen 
Monsieur and Madame La Motte. 

" I ou^ht rather to ask you that question." 
said Louis in some confusion, "for I believe 
you have seen them since I have ; and the 
pleasure of meeting you thus is equalled by 
my surprise. I have not heard from my 
father ?<»' some time, owing probably to 
my regiment being moved to new quar- 
tcrs. 

He looked as if he wished to be informed 
-with whom Adeline now was, but, as this 
was a subject upon which it was impossible 
she should speak in the presence of La Luc. 
she led the conversation to general topics, 
lUfter havii^ said that Monsieur and Madame 
La Motte were well when she left them. 
Louis spdce little, and often looked anxiously 
at Adelme, while his mind seemed labouring 
under strong oppression. She obser\'ed this, 
and recollecting the declaration he had made 
her on the morning of his departure from the 
abbey, she attributed his present embarrass- 
ment to the effect of a passion yet unsubdued, 
and did not appear to notice it. 

After he had sat nearly a quarter of an hour 
under a struggle of feelings which he could 
neither conquer nor conceal, he rose to leave 
the room, and as he passed Adeline, said, in 
a low voice, ' ' Do permit me to speak with 
jTOU alone for five minutes." 

She hesitated in some confusion, and then 
sajring there were none but friends present, 
bulged he would be seated. 

"Excuse me," said he, in the same low 
accent. " what I would say nearly concerns 
you, and you only. Do favour me with a few 
moments* attention." 

He ssdd this with a look that surprised her, 
and having ordered candles into another 
xxx>m, she went thither. 

Louis sat for some moments silent, and 
seemingly in great perturbation of mind. At 
length lie said, " I know not whether to re- 
joice or to lament at this unexpected meeting, 
though, if you are in safe hands, I ought 
certainly to rejoice, however hard the task 
that now falls to my lot. I am not ignorant 
of the dangers and persecutions you have 
suffered, and cannot forbear expressing my 
anxiety to know how you are now circum- 
stanced. Are you indeed with friends ? " 

" I am," said Adeline ; " M. La Motte has 
informed you." 

" No," replied Louis, with a deep sigh, 
"not my father." He paused. "But I do 
indeed rejoice," resumed he, "ohl how 
sincerely rejoice, that you are in safety. 



Could you know, lovely Adeline, what I liavc 
suffered 1 " He checked himself. 

" I understood you had something of im- 
portance to say, sir," said Adeline ; " you 
must excuse me if I remind you that I have 
not many moments to spare." 

" It is mdeed uf importance," replied I^uis, 
"yet I know not how to mention it— how to 

soften . This task is too severe. Alas I 

my poor friend ! " 

" Who is it you speak of, sir?" said Ade- 
line with quickness. 

Louis rose from his chair, and walked 
about the room. " I would prepare you for 
what I have to .say," he resumed, " but upon 
my soul I am not equal to it." 

" I entreat you to keep me no longer in 
suspense," said Adeline, who had a wild sus- 
picion that it was Theodore he would s[)oak of. 

Louis still hesitated. 

" Is it -oh, is it?— I conjure you tell me the 
worst at once." said she, in a voice of agony ; 
"I can Ixiar it — indeed I can." 

" My unhappy friend I " exclaimed I^uis. 

"Oh, Theodore I Theodore !" faintly arti- 
culated Adeline, " he lives then ! " 

"He does," said Louis, "but " He 

stopped. 

"But what?" cried Adeline, trembling 
violently ; "if he is living you cannot tell 
me worse than my fears suggest. I entreat 
you, therefore, not to hesitate." 

Louis resumed his seat, and endeavouring 
to assume a collected air, said, "He is living, 
madam, but he is a prisoner, and — for why 
should I deceive you? — I fear he has little 
to hope in this world." 

" I have long feared so, sir," said Adeline, 
in a voice of forced composure ; ' ' you have 
something more terrible than this to relate, 
and I again entreat you to explain your- 
self." 

' ' He has everything to apprehend from the 
Marquis de Montalt," said Louis. "Alas! 
why do 1 say to apprehend ? His judgment 
is already fixed — he is condemned to die." 

At this confirmation of her fears a death- 
like paleness diffused itself over the coun- 
tenance of Adeline ; she sat motionless, and 
attempted to sigh, but seemed almost suffo- 
cated. Terrified at her situation, and expect- 
ing to see her faint, I^uis would have 
supported her, but with her liand she waved 
him from her, unable to speak. He now 
called for assistance, and La Luc and Clara, 
with M. Verneuil, informed of Adeline's in- 
disposition, were quickly by her side. 

At the sound of their voices she looked up, 
and seemed to recollect herself, when utter- 
ing a heavy sigh she burst into tears. La 
Luc rejoiced to see her weep, encouraged her 
tears, which, after some time, relieved her ; 
and when she was able to speak, she desired 
to go back to La Luc's parlour. Louis at- 
tended her thither ; whsix ^bft ^«^ \)K^.^ssi V^ 



128 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



would livivc withdrawn, but I-a Luc begged 
ho would stay. 

♦ ' You arc, perhaps, a relation of this young 
lady, sir," said he, "and may have brought 
news of her father ? " 

" Not so, sir," replied Ix)uis, hesitating. 

"This gentleman," said Adeline, who had 
now recollected her dissipated thoughts, "is 
the son of M. T-a Motte, whom you have 
hoard me mention." 

Louis seemed shocked to be declared the 
son of a man that had once acted so un- 
worthily towards Adeline ; who, instantly 
perceiving the pain her words occasioned, 
endeavoured to soften their effect by saying 
that I ^1 Motte had saved her from imminent 
danger, and had afforded her an asylum for 
many months. Adeline sat in a state of 
dreadful solicitude to know the particulars of 
Theodore's situation, yet could not acquire 
courage to renew the subject in the presence 
of La Luc ; she ventured, however, to ask 
Louis if his own regiment was quartered in 
the town. 

He replie<l that his regiment lay at Vaceau, 
a French town on the frontiers of Spain ; 
that he had just crossed a part of the Gulf of 
I-,yons, and was on his way to Savoy, whither 
he should set out early in the morning. 

"We are lately come from thence," said 
Adeline. " May I ask to what part of Savoy 
you nre going? " 

" To Lelencourt," he replied. 

" To Lelencourt ! " said Adeline, in some 
surprise. 

" I am a stranger in the country," resumed 
Louis, • ' but I go to serve my friend. You 
seem to know lelencourt." 

" I do, indeed," said Adeline. 

" You probably know then that M. La 
Luc lives there, and will guess the motive of 
my journey. " 

"Oh heaven! is it possible?" exclaimed 
Adeline. "Is it possible that Theodore 
Peyrou is a relation of M. La Luc ? " 

• ' Theodore ! What of my son ? " asked 
La Luc in surprise and apprehension. 

" Your son ! " said Adeline in a trembling 
voice, "your son !" 

The astonishment and anguish depicted on 
her countenance increased the apprehensions 
of this unfortunate father, and he renewed 
his question. But Adeline was totally unable 
to answer him ; and the distress of Louis on 
thus unexpectedly discovering the father of 
his unhappy friend, and knowing that it was 
his task to disclose the fate of his son, de- 
prived him for some time of all power of 
utterance ; and La Luc and Clara, whose 
fears were every instant heightened by this 
dreadful silence, continued to repeat their 
questions. 

At length a sense of the approaching suf- 
ferings of the good La Luc overcoming every 
Other feeling, Adeliae recovered strength oi 



mind suffident to try to soften the intelligenoe 
Louis had to communicate, and to conduct 
Clara to another room. Here she collectel 
resolution to tell her, and with tender cm- 
sideration, the circumstances of her brothor's 
situation, concealing only her knowledge of 
his sentence being already pronounced. This, 
relation necessarily included the mention of 
their attachment ; and in the friend of her 
heart Clara discovered the innocent cause 
of her brother's destruction. Addine also 
learned the occasion of that dicumstance 
which had contributed to keep her ignorant 
of Theodore's relationship to La Loc ; s^ 
was told the former had taken the name 
of Peyrou with an estate whidi had been 
left him about a year before, by a relation of 
his mother's, upon that condition. Theodore 
had been designed for the churdi, but his 
disposition inclined him to a more active life 
than the clerical habit would adhnit of ; and 
on his accession to the estate he entered into 
the service of the French king. 

In the few and interrupted interviews which 
had been allowed them at Cauz, llieodore 
had mentioned his family to Adeline only in 
general terms ; and thus, when they were so 
suddenly separated, had, without desigmng 
it, left her in ignorance of his feUier's name 
and place of residence. 

The sacred delicacy of Adeline's gnei, 
which had never permitted her to mention 
the subject of it even to Clara, bad since ccm- 
tributed to deceive her. 

The distress of Clara, on leaning the 
situation of her brother, could endure no 
restraint. Adeline, who, by a strong effnt of 
mind, had commanded her feelings so as to 
impart this news with tolerable composorei 
was now almost overwhelmed by her own 
and Clara's accumulated sufferings. 'WhUe 
they wept forth the anguish of their hearts, a 
scene, if possible, more affecting, passed 
between La Luc and Louis ; who perceived 
it was necessary to inform him, though 
cautiously and by degrees, of the full extoit 
of his calamity. He therefore told La Lnc 
that, though Theodore had becsi first tried 
for having quitted his post, he was now con- 
demned on a charge of assault made upon 
his general ofhcer, the Marquis de Montalt, 
who had brought witnesses to prove that his 
life had been endangered by the circumstance; 
and who, having pursued the prosecution 
with the most bitter rancour, had at length 
obtained the sentence which the law could 
not withhold, but which every other officer in 
the regiment deplored. 

Louis added that the sentence was to be 
executed in less than a fortnight, and that 
Theodore, being very unhappy at receiving 
no answers to the letters he had sent his 
father, wishing to see him once more, uid 
knowing that there was now no time to be 
\osi, Vvad Tftc^^^x^d hMQ. to go to Lelencourt 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



129 



-^nd acquaint his fetfher with his situa- 
tion. 

La Log received the account of his son's 
condition with a distress that admitted neither 
of tears or complaint. He asked where Theo- 
dore was, amd aesiring to be conducted to him, 
he thanked Louis for all his kindness, and 
ordered post-horses immediately. 

A carriage was soon ready, and this un- 
happy fiUlier, after taking a mournful leave 
of M. Vemeuil, and sending a compliment to 
M. Mauron, attended by his family, set out 
for the prison of his son. The journey was a 
silent one ; each individual of the party en- 
cLeavour^, in consideration of the other. 
to suppress the expression of grief, but was 
unable to do more. La Luc appeared calm 
and complacent ; he seemed frequently to be 
engaged in prayer ; but a struggle of resig- 
nation and composure was sometimes visible 
upon his countenance, notwithstanding the 
efforts of his mind to conceal it. 



CHAPTER XIX. 

And venom'd ^th disgrace the dart of Death. 

Seward. 

We now return to the Marquis de Montalt, 
-who having seen La Motte safely lodged in 

the prison of D y, and learning that the 

trial would not come on immediately, had re- 
turned to his villa on the borders of the 
forest, where he expected to hear news of 
Addine. It had been his intention to follow 
his servants to Lyons ; but he now deter- 
mined to wait a few days for letters, and he 
had little doubt that Adeline, since her flight 
had been so quickly pursued, would be over- 
taken, and probably before she could reach 
that city. In this expectation he had been 
miserably disappointed ; for his servants in- 
fomusd him that though they traced her 
thither, t^y had neither been able to follow 
hc3* route beyond, nor to discover her at 
Lyons. This escape she probably owed to 
having nnbarked on the Rhone ; for it does 
not appear that the Marquis's people thought 
of seeking her on the course of that river. 

His presence was soon after required at 
Vaceau, where the court-martial was then 
sitting ; thither, therefore, he went, with pas- 
sions still more exasperated by his late dis- 
appointment, and procured the condemnation 
of Theodore. The sentence was universally 
lamented, for Theodore was much beloved in 
hte regiment ; and the occasion of the Mar- 
quis's personal resentment towards him bemg 
known, every heart was interested in his 
cause. 

Louis de la Motte happening at this time 
to be stationed in the same town, heard an 
imperfect account of his story, and being 
convinced that the prisoner was the young 
GhevaUer whom he had formerly seen with the 



Marquis at the abbey, he was induced, partly 
from compassion, and partly with a \io\vi. of 
hearing of his parents, to vibit him. The 
compassionate symixitliy which I^uis ex- 
ijressod, and the zeal with which \n\ tendered 
his services, affected Tlicodore, and excited 
in him a warm return of friendship. I^uis 
made him frequent visits, did everything 
tliat kindness could suggest to alleviate hu 
sufferings, and a nuitual esteem and con- 
fidence ensued. 

Theodore at length communicated the chief 
subject of his concern to Louis, who dis- 
covered, with inexpressible grief, that it w.is 
Adeline whom the Marquis had tlius cruelly 
persecuted, and Adeline for whom the 
generous Theodore was about to suffer. He 
soon perceived also that Theodore was Iiis 
favoured rival ; but he generously suppressed 
the jealous pang this discovery occasioned, 
and determined that no prejudice of passion 
should withdraw him from the duties of hu- 
manity and friendship. He eagerly inquired 
where Adeline then resided. 

"She is yet, I fear, in the power of the 
Marquis," said Theodore, sighing deeply. 
"OGod! these chains I" and he threw an 
agonising glance upon them. 

Louis sat silent and thoughtful ; at length, 
starting from his reverie, he said he would go 
to the Marquis, and inmiediately quitted the 
prison. The Marquis was, however, already 
set off for Paris, where he had been summoned 
to appear at the approaching trial of La 
Motte ; and Louis, yet ignorant of the late 
transactions at the abbey, returned to the 
prison, where he endeavoured to forget that 
Theodore was the favoured rival of his love, 
and to remember him only as the defender of 
Adeline. So earnestly he pressed his offers of 
serN'ice, that Theodore, whom the silence of 
his father equally surprised and afflicted, and 
who was very anxious to see him once again, 
accepted his proposal of going himsdf to 
Savoy. 

" My letters I strongly suspett to have 
been intercepted by the Marquis," said Theo- 
dore ; "if so, my poor father will have the 
whole weight of his calamity to sustain at 
once, unless I avail myself of your kindness, 
and I shall neither see him nor hear from him 
before I die. Louis ! there are moments 
when my fortitude shrinks from the conflict, 
and my senses threaten to desert me." 

No time was to be lost ; the warrant for his 
execution had already received the king's 
signature, and Louis immediately set forward 
to Savoy. The letters of Theodore had, 
indeed, been intercepted by order of the 
Marquis, who, in the hope of discovering the 
asylum of Adeline, had opened and after- 
wards destroyed them. 

But to return to I^a Luc, who now drew 
near Vaceau, and who his family observed to 
be greatly changed in Ivv^ VooVa ^yw» V'i. \iS4.^ 



130 



THE nOMANCB OP THB PORBST. 



heard the late calamitous intelligence ; he 
uttered no complaint ; but it was too ob^ous 
that his disorder had made a rapid progress. 
Louis, who durinf^ his journey prov^ the 
goodness of his disposition by the delicate 
attention he paid to this imhappy party, con- 
cealed his observation of the decline of La 
Luc, and, to support Adeline's spirits, en- 
deavoured to convince her that her fears on 
this subject were groundless. Her spirits did 
indeed require support, for she was now 
within a few miles of the town that contained 
Theodore ; and while her increasing pertur- 
bation almost overcame her, she yet tried to 
appear composed. When the carriage entered 
the town, she cast a timid and anxious glance 
in search of the prison ; but having passed 
through several streets without perceiving any 
building which corresponded with her idea 
of what she looked for, the coach stopped at 
the inn. 

The frequent changes in La Luc's counte- 
nance betrayed the violent agitation of his 
mind, and when he attempted to alight, feeble 
and exhausted, he was compelled to accept 
the support of Louis, to whom he faintly said, 
as he passed to the parlour, " I am indeed 
sick at heart, but I trust the pain will not be 
long." Louis pressed his hand without speak- 
ing, and hastened back for Adeline and Clara, 
who were already in the passage. La Luc 
wiped the tears from his eyes (they were the 
first he had shed) as they entered the room. 
*• I would go immediately to my poor boy," 
said he to Lotiis ; •' yours, sir, is a mournful 
office — ^be so good as to conduct me to him." 
He rose to go, but feeble and overcome with 
grief, again sat down. Adeline and Clara 
united in entreating that he would compose 
himself, and take some refreshment, and Louis, 
urging the necessity of preparing Theodore 
for the interview, prevailed with him to delay 
it till his son should be informed of his arrival, 
and immediately quitted the inn for the prison 
of his friend. When he was gone La Luc, as 
a duty he owed those he loved, tried to take 
some support, but the convulsions of his throat 
would not suffer him to swallow the wine he 
held to his parched lips, and he was now so 
much disordered, that he desired to retire to 
his chamber, where alone, and in praj'cr, he 
passed the dreadful interval of Louis's ab- 
sence. 

Clara, on the bosom of Adeline, who sat in 
calm but deep distress, yielded to the violence 
of her grief. " I shall lose my dear father 
too," said she ; "I see it ; I shall lose my 
father and my brother together." Adeline 
wept with her friend for some time in silence ; 
and then attempted to persuade her that La 
Luc was not so ill as she apprehended. 

"Do not mislead me with hope," she re* 
plied, ' ' he will not survive the shock of this 
calamity ; I saw it from the first." Adeline 
knowing ihsxi La Luc's distress would be 



hdffhtened br theobservance of hU daughter's, 
and that indulgenoe would only increase its 
poignancyt endeavoured to rouse her to an 
exertion of fortitude, by iirging the necessity 
of commanding her emotion in the presence 
of her fiither. ' ' This is possible," added she, 
" however painful may be the efibrt Yoa 
must know, my dear, that my grief is not in- 
ferior to your own, yet I have mtherto been 
enabled to support my suflferings in silence ; 
for M. La Luc I do, indeed, km and cever- 
enceasaparent." 

I.iOuis meanwhile reached the prison of 
Theodore, who received him with an air of 
mingled surprise and impatience. "What 
brings you back so soon?" said he ; "have 
you heard news of my father?" Louis now 
gradually unfolded the drcumstanoes of their 
meeting, and La Luc's arrival at Vacean. A 
various emotion agitated the countenance of 
Theodore on receiving this inteUiges&oe. *' My 
poor father I " said he, "he hasthen followed 
his son to this ignominious place I Little did 
I think when last we parted he would meet 
me in a prison, under condemnation 1 " This 
reflection roused an impetuosity (rf grief which 
deprived him for some time of speech. " But 
where is he ?" said Theodore, recovering him- 
self ; "now he is. come I shrink iirom the 
interview I have so much wished for. The 
sight of his distress will be dreadful to me. 
Louis, when I am gone, comfort mj poor 
father." His voice was again intennq>tea by 
sobs ; and Louis, who had been ferfol of 
acquainting him at the same tfane of the 
arrival of La Luc, and the discovery of 
Adeline, now judged it proper to admimster 
the cordial of this latter intelligence. 

The glooms of a prison and of calamity 
vanished for a transient moment ; those who 
had seen Theodore would have believed this 
to be the instant which gave him life and 
liberty. When his first emotions subsided, 
" I will not repine," said he, " since I kmyw 
that Adeline is preserved, and that I shidl 
once more see my 'father. I will endeavour to 
die with resignation." He inquired if La 
Luc was then in the prison, and was told he 
was at the inn with Clara and Adeline. 
"Adeline! Is Adeline there too? This is 
beyond my hopes. Yet why do I r^oioe? I 
must never see her more ; this is no place for 
Adeline." Again he relapsed into an agony 
of distress, and again repeated a thousand 
questions concerning Adeline, till he \vas re- 
minded by Louis that his father was impa- 
tient to see him ; when, shocked that he had 
so long detained his friend, he entreated him 
to conduct La Luc to the prison, and en- 
deavoured to collect fortitude for the ap- 
proaching interview. 

When Louis returned to the inn La Luc 
was still in his chamber, and Clara quitting 
the room to call him, Adeline seized wim 
trembling impatience the opportunity to in- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 131 

quire more particularly concerning Theodore support his father, Louis ran out for other 
than she chose to do in the presence of his assist incc. 

unhappy sister. Louis represented him to be "I sliall soon be better, Theodore," said I.a 
much more tranquil than he really was. Luc, unclosing his eyes; "the faintncss is 
Adeline was somewhat soothed by the ac- already gone off. I have not been well of late, 
count, and her tears, hitherto restrained, and this sad meeting ! " 
flowed siloitly and fast, till La Luc appeared. Unable any longer to command himself, 
His countenance had recovered its serenity, Theodoru wrung his hands, and the distress 
but was impressed with a deep and steady which had long stniggled for utterance burst 
sorrow, which excited in the beholder a min- in convulsive sobs from his breast. I^ Luc 
l^led emotion of pity and reverence. " How gradually revived, and exerted himself to cahn 
IS my son, sir?' said he, as he entered the the transports of his son ; but the fortitude 
room. '• We willgo to him immeduitely." of the latter had now entirely forsaken him. 

Clara renewed the entreaties tliat had been and he could only utter exclaniption and 
already rejected, to accompany her father, complaint. "Ah ! little did I think we should 
who persisted in a refusal. ever meet under circumstances so dreadful 

" To-morrow you shall see him, "added he ; as the present I But I have not dcscr\cd 
" but our first meeting must be alone. Stay them, my father! The motives of my con- 
with your friend, my dear, she has need of duct have still been just 1 " 
consolation." "Tliat is my supreme consol.ition," said 

When La Luc was gone, Adeline, unable La Luc, "and ought to support you in this 
longer to struggle against the force of grief, hour of trial. The Almighty God, who is the 
retired to her chamber and her bed. judge of hearts, will reward you hereafter. 

La Luc walked silently towards the prison, Tnist in Him, my son ; I look to Him with 
resting on the arm of Louis. It was now no feeble hope ; with a firm reliance on His 
night ; a dim lamp that hung above showed justice 1 " La Luc's voice falt(;red ; he raised 
them the gates, and Louis rang a bell ; La his eyes to heaven with an expression of meek 
Luc, almost overcome with agitation, leaned devotion, while the tears of humanity fell 
against the postern till the porter appeared, slowly on his cheek. 

lie inquired for Theodore, and followed the Still more affected by his last words, Theo- 
xnan ; out when he reached the second court- dore turned from him, and paced the room 
yard he seemed ready to faint, and again with quick steps. The entrance of Louis was 
stopped. Louis desired the porter would a very seasonable relief to La Luc, who, tsiking 
fetch some water, but La Luc, recovering his a cordial he had brought, was soon sufficiently 
voioe, S8ud he should soon be better, and restored to discourse on the subject most 
would not suffer him to go. In a few minutes interesting to him. Theodore tried to attain 
lie was able to follow Louis, who led him a command of his feelings, and succeeded. 
through several dark passages, and up a flight He conversed with tolerable composure for 
of steps to a door, which l^ing unbarred dis- above an hour, during which \jx Luc endea- 
closed to him the prison of his son. He was voured to elevate, by religious hope, the mind 
seated at a small table on which stood a lamp of his son, and to enable him to meet with 
that threw a feeble light across the place, fortitude the awful hour that approached. 
sufficient only to show its desolation and But the appearance of resignation which Theo- 
wretchedness. When he perceived \j\ Luc, dore attained always vanished when he re- 
he sprang from his chair, and in the next fleeted that he was going to leave his father a 
moment was in his arms. "My father ! " said prey to grief, and his beloved Adeline for ever. 
he in a tremulous voice. "My son ! " exclaimed When La Luc was about to depart, he again 
La Luc ; and they were for some time silent, mentioned her. 
and locked in each other's embrace. "Afflicting as an interview must be in our 

At length Theodore led him to the only present circumstances," said he, "I cannot 
chair the room afforded, and seating himself bear the thought of quitting the world with- 
with Louis at the foot of the bed, had leisure out seeing her once again ; yet I know not huv^r 
to observe the ravages which illness and to ask her to encounter, for my sake, the miseiy 
calamity had made on the features of his of a parting scene. Tell her that my thoughts 

parent. La Luc made several efforts to speak, never for a moment leave her ; tliat " 

but, unable to articulate, laid his hand I>a Luc interrupted, and assured him that 
upon his breast and sighed deeply. Fearful since he so much wished it he should see her, 
of the consequences of so affecting a scene though a meeting could serve only to heighten 
on his shattered frame, Louis endeavoured to the mutual anguish of a final separation. 
call off his attention from the immediate " I know it — I know it too well," said Theo- 
object of his distress, and interrupted the dore; "yet I cannot resolve to see her no 
silence ; but La Luc, shuddering and com- more, and thus spare her the pain this inter- 
plaining he was very cold, sank back in his view must inflict. Oh, my fnlher 1 when I 
chair. His condition roused Theodore from think of those whom I must .soon leave for 
the stupor of despair ; and while he flew to ever my heail bieaJka, '^w\.\\t''^ Yci^<s:&^vri 



'32 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



to profit by your precept and example, and 
show that your paternal care has not been in 
vain. My good Louis, go with my father — 
he has need of support. How much I owe 
this generous friend," added Theodore, "you 
well know, sir." 

" I do, in truth," replied La Luc, "and can 
never repay his kindness to you. He has 
contributed to support us all ; but you require 
comfort more than myself — he shall remain 
with you — I will go alone." 

This Theodore would not suffer ; and La 
Luc no longer opposing him, they affectionately 
embraced, and separated for the night. 

When they reached the inn, La Luc con- 
sulted with Louis on the possibility of address- 
ing a petition to the sovereign in time enough to 
save Theodore. His distance from Paris, and 
the short intcr\'al before the period fixed for 
the execution of the sentence, made this de- 
sign difficult ; but believing it was practicable. 
La Luc, incapable as he appeared of per- 
form ing so long a journey, determined to 
attempt it. Louis, thinking that the under- 
taking would prove fatal to the father, 
without benefiting the son, endeavoured, 
though faintly, to dissuade him from it — but 
his resolution was fixed. " If I sacrifice the 
small remains of my life in the service of my 
child," said he, "I shall lose little ; if I save 
him, I shall gain everything. There is no 
time to be lost — I will set off immediately." 

He would have ordered post-horses, but 
Louis, and Clara, who was now come from 
the bcd-sidc of her friend, urged the necessity 
of his taking a few hours' repose. He was 
at length compelled to acknowledge himself 
unequal to the immediate exertion which 
parental anxiety prompted, and consented to 
seek rest. 

When he had retired to his chamber, Clara 
lamented the condition of her father. " He 
will not bear the journey," said she ; "he is 
greatly changed within these few days. Louis 
was so entirely of her opinion, that he could 
not disguise it, even to flatter her with a hope. 
She added, what did not contribute to raise 
his spirits, that Adeline was so much indis- 
posed by her grief for the situation of Theo- 
dore, and the sufferings of La Luc, that she 
dreaded the consequence. 

It has been seen that the passion of young 
La Motto had suffered no abatement from time 
or absence ; on the contrary, the persecution 
and the dangers which had pursued Adeline 
awakened all his tenderness, and drew her 
nearer to his heart. When he had discovered 
that Theodore loved her, and was beloved 
again, he experienced all the anguish of 
jealousy and disappointment ; for though she 
had forbade him to hope, he found it too 
painful an effort to obey her, and had secretly 
cherished the flame which he ought to have 
slifled. His heart was, however, too noble 
tosufkrlus zeal for Theodore to abate because 



he was his fevoured rival, and his mind too 
strong not to conceal the anguish this 
certainty occasioned. The attachment wluch 
Theodore had testified towards Adeline even 
endeared him to Louis, when he had re- 
covered from the first shock of disappointment ; 
and tliat conquest over jealousy which o^gi- 
nated in principle, and was ptusued with 
difficulty, became afterwards his pride and his 
glory, when, however, he againsaw Adeline — 
saw her in the mild dignity of sorrow, more 
interesting than ever — saw her, thou^ anking 
beneath its pressure, yet tender and aoUcitous 
to soften the afflictions of those around her — 
it was with the utmost dilficidty he presoved 
his resolution, and forbore to express the 
sentiments she inspired. When he further 
considered that her acute sufferings arose 
from the strength of her affieoion, he more 
than ever wish^ himself the object of a heart 
capable of so tender a regard, and Theodore 
in prison, and in chains, was a momentary 
object of envy. 

In the mommg, when La Luc arose from 
short and disturbed slumbers, he found Louis, 
Clara, and Adeline, whom indisposition conld 
not prevent from paying him tnis testimony 
of respect and affection, assembled in tfaie 
parlour of the inn to see him depart. After 
a slight breakfast, during which his fee^ngi 
permitted him to say little, he bade his fixnSs 
a sad farewell, and stepped into the carria^ 
followed by their tears and prayers. Addine 
immediately retired to her chaniber, \^ich 
she was too ill to quit tliat day. In the 
evening Clara left her friend, and, conducted 
by Louis, went to visit her brother, whose 
emotions, on hearing of his father's departnre^ 
were various and strong. 



CHAPTER XX. 

"Us only when with inbred honor ^.^ 

Of some base act, or done, or to be domu 
That the recoiling soul, with conscioiumMd, 
Shrinks back in itself. MasoK, 

We return now to Pierre de la Motte, who, 
after remaining some weeks in the prison of 

D y, was removed to take his trial in the 

courts of Paris, whither the Marquis de 
Montalt followed to prosecute the chaige. 
Madame de la Motte accompanied her 
husband to the prison of the ChAtelet. His 
mind sank under the weight of his mi^^ 
fortunes, nor could all the efforts of his wife 
rouse him from the torpidity of despair 
which a consideration of his circmnstanoes 
occasioned. Should he even be acquitted of 
the charge brought against him by the Mar- 
quis (which was very unlikely) he was now in 
the scene of his former crimes, and the mo- 
ment that should liberate him from the wiUls 
of his prison would probably deliver him 
QL^Qccn. vqXo \.b& bauds of offended justice. 



THE ROMANCE OP THE FOREST. 



133 



The iirosecntion of the Marquis was too 
well founded, and its object of a nature too 
serious, not to justify the terror of La Motte. 
Soon aifter the lalter had settled at the Abbey 
of St. Clair, the small stock of money which 
the emergency di his circumstances had left 
him being nearly exhausted, his mind became 
corroded with the most cruel anxiety con- 
cerning the means of his future subsistence. 
As he was one evening riding alone in a 
remote part of the forest, musing on his dis- 
tressed circumstances, and meditating plans 
to relieve the exigencies which he saw ap- 
proaching, be perceived among the trees, at 
some distance, a chevalier on horseback, who 
was riding deliberately along, and seemed 
wholly unattended. A thought darted across 
the mind of La Motte, that he might be 
spared the evUs which threatened him, by 
robbing this stranger. His former practices 
had p^sed the boundary of honesty, fraud 
was in some d^^iee familiar to him, and the 
thought was not dismissed. He hesitated — 
v^rtxy moment increased the power of tempta- 
tion — the opportunity was such as might 
never occur again. He looked round, and 
as far as the trees opened, saw no person 
but the chevalier, who seemed to be a man 
of distinction. Summoning all his courage. 
La Motte rode forward and attacked him. 
The Marquis de Montalt, for it was him, 
was umumed, but knowing that his atten- 
dants were not far off, he refused to yield. 
While they were struggling for victory. La 
Motte saw several horsemen enter the ex- 
tremity of the avenue, and rendered despe- 
rate by opposition, he drew from his pocket 
a pistol (which an apprehension of banditti 
made him usually carry when he rode to a 
distance from the abbey) and hred at the 
Marquis, who staggered, and fell senseless to 
the ground. La Motte had time to steal 
from his coat a brilliant star, some diamond 
rings from his fingers, and to rifle his pockets, 
before his attendants came up. Instead of 
pursuing the robber, they all, in their first 
confusion, flew to assist their lord, and La 
Motte escaped. 

He stopped before he reached the abbey, 
at a little ruin, the tomb before mentioned, 
to examine his booty. It consisted of a 
purse, containing seventy louis-d'ors ; of a 
diamond star, three rings of great value, and 
a miniature of the Marquis, set with bril- 
liants, which he had intended as a present 
for his favourite mistress. To La Motte. 
who but a few hours before had seen himself 
nearly destitute, the view of this treasure 
excited an almost ungovernable transport ; 
but it was soon checked, when he remem- 
bered the means he had employed to obtain 
it, and that he had paid for the wealth he 
contemplated the price of blood ! Naturally 
violent in his passions, this reflection sank 
him from the simunit ol exiiitation Xo the 



abyss of despondency. He considered him- 
self a murderer, and startled as one 
awakened from a dream, would have given 
half the world, had it been his, to have Ix-en 
as poor, and, comparatively, as guiltless, as he 
had been a few hours before. On examining 
the portrait, he discovered the resemblance, 
and believing he had deprived the original of 
life, he gazed ui>on the picture with Ulter 
anguish. To the horrors of remorse suc- 
ceeded the perplexities of fear. Apprehen- 
sive of he knew not what, he lingered at the 
tomb, where he at length dt^posited liis 
treasure, believing, that if his offence should 
aN\-aken justice, the abbey might be searched, 
and these jewels betray him. 

From Madame La Motte it was easy to 
conceal his increase uf wealth ; for, as he had 
never made her acc^uainted with the exact 
state of his finances, she had not suspected 
the extreme poverty which menaced him ; 
and, as they continued lo hvc as usual, she 
believed that their expenses were drawn from 
the usual supi)ly. But it was not so easy to 
disguise the workings of remorse and horror. 
His manner became gloomy and reser\'ed ; 
and his frequent visits to the tomb, where he 
went partly to look at his treasure but cliiefly 
to indulge in the dreadful pleasure of con- 
templating the picture of the Marquis, ex- 
cited curiosity. In the solitude of the forest, 
where no variety of objects occurred to reno- 
vate his ideas, the horrible one of liaving 
committed murder was ever present to him. 

When the MarquLs arrived at the abl>ey, 
the astonishment and terror of La Motte — 
for at first he scarcely knew whether he be- 
held the shadow or the substance of a human 
form— were quickly succeeded by apprehen- 
sion of the punishment due to the crime he 
had really committed. When his distress had 
prevailed on the Marquis to retire, he in- 
formed him that he was by birth a chevaher ; 
he then touched upon such parts of his mis- 
fortunes as he thought would excite pity, 
expressed such abhorrence of his guilt, and 
uttered such a solemn promise of returning 
the jewels he had yet in his possession — for 
he had ventured to dispose only of a sm^dl 
part — that the Marquis at length Ustened to 
him with some degree of compassion. This 
favourable sentiment, seconded by a selfish 
motive, induced the Marquis to compromise 
with La Motte. Of quick and inflammable 
passions, he had observed the beauty of 
Adeline with an eye of no common regard ; 
and he resolved to spare the life of La Motte 
upon no other condition than the sacrifice of 
this unfortunate girl. La Motte had neither 
resolution nor virtue sufficient to reject the 
terms— the jewels were restored, and he con- 
sented to betray the innocent Adeline. But 
as he was too well acquainted with her heart 
to believe that she nwomIA. eas^SJi^ \i^ ^Ciw. Vi 
the practice ol >nK», wi^ «& \i^ ^^C^ \sS^. ^ 



134 THE ROMANCE OP THE FOREST. 

degree of pity and tenderness for her, he en- which he had quitted it. Ab he walked 

deavoured to prevail on the Marquis to for- through one of the avenues, he passed a man 

bear precipitate measures, and to attempt who stood by to kt him proceed, and who 

gradually to undermine her principles by regarded him with a fixed and earnest e^ 

seducing: her affections. He approved and La Motte thought he had seen him before; but 

adopted this plan. The failure of his first the imperfect view he caught cf his features 

scheme induced him to employ the stratagems through the duskiness of the ptoce made him 

he afterwards pursued, and thus to multiply uncertain as to this, and his mind was in too 

the misfortunes of Adeline. perturbed a state to suffer him to fed an 

Such were the circumstances which had mterest on the subject. When he was jp^one 

brought I^ Motte to his present deplorable the stranger inquired of the keeper of the 

situation. The cUiy of trial was now come, prison who La Motte was ; on being told, 

and lie was led from prison into the court, and receiving answers to some further ques- 

where the Marquis appeared as his accuser, tions he put, he desired he might be admitted 

When the charge was delivered, La Motte, to speak with him. 

as is usual, pleaded Not guilty, and the Advo- The request, as the man was onljr a debtor, 

catc Nemours, who had undertaken to plead was granted ; but as the doors were now 

for him, afterwards endeavoured to make it shut for the night, the interview was deferred 

ajjpear that the accusation, on the part of the till the morrow. 

Marquis dc Montalt, was false and malicious. I^i Motte found Madame, inhisioom, where 

To this purpose he mentioned the circum- she had been waiting for some hooia to hear 

stance of the latter having attempted to the event of the triaT They now ¥nshed mnne 

persuade his client to tlic murder of Adeline ; earnestly than ever to see their son ; but thejr 

ne further urged that the Marquis had lived were, as he had suspected, ignorant of Mschange 

in habits of intinncy with La Motte for of quarters, owing to the letters whidi he had, 

several months immediately preceding his as usual, addre^ed to them, under an as- 

arrest ; and that it was not till he had dis- sumed name, remaining at the post-house of I 

appointed the designs of his accuser, by con- Auboine. This drcumstanoe occasioned Ma- 

veying beyond his reach the unhappy object dame La Motte to address her letters lo the | 

of his vengeance, that the Marquis had place of her son's late resideooe, and he had | 

thought proper to charge La Motte with the thus continued ignorant of his fiuber's mis- | 

crime for which he stood indicted. Nemours fortunes and removal. Madame La Motte; ! 

urged the improbability of one man's keeping surprised at receiving no answer to her letters, 

up a friendly intercourse with another from sent off another, containing an acoofont of the 

whom he had suffered the double injury of trial, as far as it had proceeded, and a request 

assault and robbery; yet it was certain that that her son would obtain loive of ateence, and 

the Marquis had observed a frequent inter- set out for Paris instantly. As she was stiD 

course with I^a Motte for some months ignorant of the failure of her letters, and, had 

following the time specified for the commis- it been otherwise, would not have known 

sion of the crime. If the Marquis intended whither to have sent them, she directed them 

to prosecute, why was it not immediately as usual. 

after his discovery of La Motte ? And if not Meanwhile his approaching fate was never 
then, what had influenced him to prosecute absent for a moment from the mind of La 
at so distant a period ? Motte, which, feeble by nature, and still 
^?/^'^ nothing was replied on the part of more enervated by habits of indulgence, re- 
the Marquis ; for. as his conduct on this point fused to support him at this dreadful period. 
had been subservient to his designs on Ade- While these scenes were passing at ftwis, 
line, he could not justify it but by exposing La Luc arrived there without aay accident. 
.schemes which would betray the darkness of after performing a journey, during which he 
his character and invalidate his cause. He had been supported almost entirdy by the 
therefore contented himself with producing spirit of his resolution. He hastened to 
several of his servants as witnesses of the throw himself at the feet of his sovereign. 
assault and robbery, who swore, without and such was the excess of his feding, on 
scniple, to the person of La Motte, though presenting the petition which was to decide 
not one of them had seen him otherwise than the fate of his son, that he could only look 
through the gloom of evening, and riding off silently up. and then fainted. The king te- 
at full speed. On a cross-examination most ceived the paper, and giving orders for the 
of them contradicted each other ; tlieir evi- unhappy father to be taken care of oassed 
dence was of course rejected. But, as the on. He was carried back to his hotel, where 
Marquis had yet two other witnesses to pro- he waited the event of this his final effort. 
duce. whose arrival at Paris had been hourly Adeline, meanwhile, continued at Vacenu, 
expected, the event of the trial was postponed, in a slate of anxiety too powerful for her lonf 
iJm^^'^ adjourned agitated frame, and the ilhiess, in cons^ 
undfr th^ "^^^ reconducted lo his ptisou cvuetvce of this, confined her" ahnost whoUy Ui 
unaer wc same pressure of despondency witVi Yi« c\\3Ltv\\Mii. ^twi-Cvn** %Va ventured to 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST 



«3S 



flatter hersdf with a hope that La Liie's 
journey woidd be successnxl, but these short 
and illusive intervals of comfort seemed only 
to heighten, by contrast, the despondency 
that succeeded, and, in the alternate extremes 
of feding, she eiperienced a state more tor- 
turing than that produced cither by the sharp 
sting cS. unexpected calamity, or the sullen 
pain of settled despair. 

When she was well enough, she came down 
to the parlour to converse with Louis, who 
brought her frequent accounts of Theodore, 
and who passed every moment he could 
snatch from the duty of his profession in 
endeavours \o support and console his af- 
flicted friends. Adeline and Theodore 
boUi looked to him for the little comfort 
allotted them, for he brought them intel- 
ligence of each other, and, whenever he 
appeared, a transient melancholy kind of 
IMoasure played round their hearts. He could 
not conceal from Theodore Adeline's indis- 
position, shice it was necessary to account for 
her not indulging the earnest wish he re- 
peatedly expressed to see her again. To 
Adeline he spoke chiefly of the fortitude and 
resignation of his friend, not forgetting to 
mention the tender aflection he constantly 
expressed for her. Accustomed to derive her 
sofe consolation from the presence of Louis, 
and to observe his unwearied friendship 
towards him whom she so truly loved, she 
found her esteem for him ripen into gratitude 
and her regard daily increase. 

The fortitude with which he had said 
Theodore supported his calamities was some- 
what exaggerated. He could not sufficiently 
forget those ties which bound him to life to 
meet his fate with firmness ; but though the 
paroxysms of grief were acute and frequent, 
ne sought, and often attained, in the presence 
of his friends, a manly composure. From 
the event of his father's journey he hoped 
littie, yet that little was sufficient to keep his 
nund in the torture of suspense till the issue 
should appear. 

On the day preceding that fixed for the 
earecution of the sentence, La Luc reached 
Vaceau. Adeline was at her chamber Nvin- 
dow when the carriage drew up to the inn ; 
she saw him alight, and, with feeble steps, 
supported by Peter, enter the house. From 
the languor of his air she drew no favourable 
omen, and, almost sinking under the violence 
of her emotion, she went to meet him. Clara 
was already with her father when Adeline 
entered the room. She approached him, but, 
dbreading to receive from his lips a confirma- 
tion of the misfortune his countenance seemed 
to indicate, she looked expressively at him 
and sat down, unable to speak the question 
she would have asked. He held out his hand 
to her in silence, sank back in his chair, and 
seemed to be fainting under oppression of 
heart. His manner confirmed all her fears ; 



at this dreadful conviction her senses failed 
her, and she sat motionless and stupefied. 

La Luc and Clara were too mucli occupied 
by their own distress to observe lier situation. 
After some time she breathed a heavy sigh, 
and burst into tears. Relieved by weeping, 
her spirits gradually returned, and she at 
length said to La Luc, " It is unnecessary, 
sir, to ask the event of your journey, yet 
when you can bear to mention the subject I 
wish " 

La Luc uraved his hand. "Alas!" said 
he, "I have nothing to tell but what you 
already guess too well. My poor Theodore I " 

His voice was convulsed with sorrow, and 
some moments of unutterable anguish fol* 
lowed. 

Adeline was the first who recovered suf» 
ficient recollection to notice the extreme laa* 
guor of La Luc, and attend to his support. 
She ordered him refreshments, and entreated 
he would retire to his bed, and suffer her to 
send for a physician, adding that the fatigua 
he had sufiiered made repose absolutely neces* 
sary. 

"Would that I could find it, my dear 
child," said he ; "it is not in this world that 
I must look for it. but in a better, and that 
better I trust I shall soou attain. But wher« 
is our good friend Louis La Motte? Ha 
must lead me to my son." 

Grief again interrupted his utterance, and 
the entrance of Louis was a seasonable relief 
to them all. Their tears explained the ques- 
tion he would have asked. La Luc immedi* 
ately inquired for his son, and thanking Louis 
for all his kindness to him, desired to be con- 
ducted to the prison. 

Louis endeavoiu'ed to persuade him to 
defer his visit till the morning, and Adeline 
and Clara joined their entreaties with his ; 
but La Luc had determined to go that night. 

"His time is short," said he; "a few 
hours and I shall see him no more, at least 
in this world ; let me not neglect these 
precious moments. Adeline i I had promised 
my poor boy that he should see you once 
more ; you are not now equal to the meeting'. 
I will try to reconcile him to the disappoint- 
ment ; but if I fail, and you are better m the 
morning, I know you will exert yourself to 
sustain the interview." 

Adeline looked impatient, and attempted 
to speak. La Luc rose to depart, but could 
only reach the door of the room, where, faint 
and feeble, he sat down in a chair. ' ' I must 
submit to necessity, " said he ; "I find I am 
not able to go farther to-night. Go to him. 
La Motte, and tell him I am somewhat 
disordered by my journey, but that I will be 
with him early in the morning. Do not 
flatter him with a hope ; prepare him for the 
worst." There was a pause of silence ; La 
Luc, at length recovering himself, desired 
Clara would otdet Yiia >Qit^ No \» ^<3k\. vsasMx 



136 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



and she willingly obeyed. When he with- 
drew Adeline told Louis, what was indeed 
unnecessary, the event of La Luc's journey. 
" I own," continued she, " that I had some- 
times suffered myself to hope, and I now feel 
this calamity with double force. I fear, too, 
that M. La Luc will sink under its pressure ; 
he is much altered for the worse since he set 
out for Paris. Tell me your opinion sin- 
cerely." 

The change \yas so obvious that Louis 
could not deny it, but he endeavoured to 
soothe her apprehension by ascribing this 
alteration, in a great measure, to the tem- 
porary fatigue of travelling. Adeline declared 
her resolution of accompanying La Luc to 
take leave of Theodore in the morning. ' ' I 
know not how I shall support the interview," 
said she; "but to see him once more is a 
duty I owe both to him and myself. The 
remembrance of having neglected to give him 
this last proof of affection would pursue me 
with incessant remorse." 

After some further discourse on this subject 
Louis withdrew to the prison, ruminating on 
the best means of imparting to his friend the 
fatal intelligence he had to communicate. 
TheodOTC received it with more composure 
than he had expected ; but he asked with 
ifnpatioKze why he did not see his father and 
Adeline, and on being informed that indispo- 
sition Withheld them, his imagination seized 
on the worst possibihty, and suggested that 
his father was dead. It was a considerable 
time beibre Louis could convince him of the 
contrary, and that Adeline was not danger- 
ously ill ; when, however, he was assured that 
he should see them in the morning, he became 
more tranquil. He desired his friend would 
not leave him that night. " These are the 
last hours we can pass together," added he ; 
' ' I cannot sleep I Stay with me and lighten 
these heavy moments. I have need of com- 
fort, Louis. Young as I am, and held by 
such strong attachments, I cannot quit the 
world with resignation. I know not how to 
credit those stories we hear of philosophic 
fortitude ; wisdom cannot teach us cheerfully 
to resign a good, and life in my circumstances 
is surely such." 

The night was passed in embarrassed con- 
versation, sometimes interrupted by long fits 
of silence, and sometimes by the paroxysms 
of despair ; and the morning of that day 
which was to lead Theodore to death at 
length dawned through the grates of his prison. 

La Luc meanwhile passed a sleepless and 

dreadful night. He prayed for fortitude and 

resignation both for himself and Theodore ; 

but the pangs of nature were powerful in his 

heart, and not to be subdued. The idea of 

his lamented wife, and of what she would 

have suffered hjid she lived to witness l\\e 

ijgrnommious death which awaited her son, 

trequently occurred to him. 



It seemed as if a destiny had hung over the 
life of Theodore, for it is probable that the 
king might have granted the petition of the 
unhappy father had it not happened that the 
Marquis de Montalt was present at court 
when the paper was presented. The appear- 
ance and singular distress of the petitions' 
had interested the monarch, and, instead of 
putting by the paper, he opened it. As he 
threw his eyes over it, observing that the 
criminal was of the Marquis de Montalt's 
regiment, he turned to him, and inquired the 
nature of the offence for which the culprit was 
about to suffer. The answer was such as 
might have been expected from the Marquis, 
and the king was convinced that Theodore 
was not a proper object of mercy. 

But to return to La Luc, who was called,, 
according to his order, at a very early hour.. 
Having passed some time in prayer, he went, 
down to the parlour, where Louis, punctual* 
to the moment, already waited to conduct him.: 
to the prison. He appeared calm and col- 
lected ; but his countenance was impressed^ 
with a fixed despair that sensibly affected hiS' 
young friend. While they waited for Adeline- 
he spoke little, and seemed struggling to> 
attain the fortitude necessary to support hinv- 
through the approaching scene. Adeline not- 
appearing, he at length sent to hasten heTr 
and was told she ha^ been iU, but was re- 
covering. She had, indeed, passed a night 
of such agitation, that her frame had sunk 
under it, and she was now endeavourii^ to 
recover strength and composure sufficient to 
sustain her in this dreadful hour. Every 
moment that brought her nearer to it had in- 
creased her emotion, and the apprehension of 
being prevented seeing Theodore had alone 
enabled her to struggle against the united 
pressure of illness and grief. 

She now, with Clara, joined La Luc, who 
advanced as they entered the room, and took 
a hand of each in silence. After some momoits 
he proposed to go, and they stepped into a 
carriage which conveyed them to the gates of 
the prison. The crowd had already begua to 
assemble there, and a confused murmur arose 
as the carriage moved forward ; it was a 
grievous sight to the friends of TheodorCi. 
Louis supported Adeline when she alighted ; 
she was scarcely able to walk, and with 
trembling steps she followed La Luc, whonk 
the keeper led towards that part of the prison 
where his son was confined. It -was now 
eight o'clock ; the sentence was not to be 
executed till twelve, but a guard of soldiers 
was already placed in the court, and as this 
unhappy party passed along the narrow 
avenues, they were met by several officers who 
had been to take a last farewell of Theodore. 
As they ascended the stairs that led to his 
apartment, La Luc's ear caught the clink of 
chains, a.ivCL\\e,2cc^\ikft. Nwilking above with a 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



»37 



overcome by the moment which now pressed 
upon him, stopped, and was obliged to support 
himself by the banister. Louis, fearing that 
the consequence of his grief might be fatal, 
shattered as his frame already was, would 
have gone for assistance, but he made a sign 
to him to stay. " I am better," said La Luc ; 
" Oil God ! support me through this hour ! " 
and in a few minutes he was able to proceed. 

As the warder unlocked the door, the harsh 
grating of the key shocked Adeline, but in the 
next moment she was in the presence of 
Theodore, who sprang to meet her, and 
caught her in his arms before she sank to the 
gfround. As her head reclined on his shoulder, 
he again viewed that countenance so dear to 
him, which had so often lighted rapture in his 
heart, and which, though pale and inanimate 
as it now was, awakened him to momentary 
delight. When at length she unclosed her 
eyes, she fixed than in long and mournful 
gaze upon Theodore, who, pressing h^ to his 
heart, could answer her only with a smile of 
mingled tenderness and despair ; the tears he 
endeavoured to restrain trembled in his eyes, 
and he forgot for a time everything but Adeline. 
La Luc, who had seated himself at the foot 
of the bed, seemed unconscious of what 
passed around him, and entirely absorbed in 
his own grief ; but Clara, as she clasped the 
band of her brother, and hung weeping on his 
arm, expressed aloud all the anguish of her 
heart, and at length recalled the attention of 
Adeline, who, in a voice scarcely audible, en- 
treated she would spare her father. Her 
words roused Theodore, and supporting 
Adeline to a chair, he turned to La Luc. 
•* My dear child 1 " said La Luc, grasping his 
hand, and bursting into tears, "my dear 
c^ildl" They wept together. After a long 
interval of silence, he said, '• I thought I 
could have supported this hour, but I am old 
and feeble. God knows my efforts for re- 
signation, my faith in his goodness." 

Theodore, by a strong and sudden exer- 
tion, assiuned a comiposed and firm counte- 
nance, and endeavoured, by every gentle 
argument, to soothe and comfort his weeping 
friends. La Luc at length seemed to 
conquer his sufferings ; drying his eyes, he 
said : "My son, I ought to Imve set you a 
better example, and practised the precepts of 
fortitude I have so often given you. But it 
is over ; I know, and will perform, my duty." 

Adeline breathed a heavy sigh, and con- 
tinued to weep. 

•* Be comforted, my love, we part but for a 
time," said Theodore, as he kissed the tears 
from her cheek ; and uniting her hand with 
that of his father's, he earnestly recom- 
mended her to his protection. " Receive 
her," added he, "as the most precious legacy 
I can bequeath ; consider her as your child. 
She will console you when I am gone, she 
will more thaa supply the loss of your son," 



La Luc assured him that he did now, and 
should continue to, regard Adeline as his 
daughter. During these afflicting hours he 
endeavoured to dissipate the terrors of ap- 
proaching death, by inspiring his son with 
religious confidence. His conversation vras 
pious, rational, and consolatory; he spoke 
not f^om the cold dictates of the head, but 
from the feelings of a heart which had long 
loved and practised tlie pure precepts of 
Christianity, and which now drew from them 
a comfort, such as nothing earthly could 
bestow. 

" You are young, my son," said he, " and 
are yet innocent of any great crime ; you 
may, therefore, look on death without terror, 
for to the guilty only is its approach 
dreadful. I feel that I shall not long survive 
you, and I trust in a merciful God that we 
shall meet in a state where sorrow never 
comes ; where the San of Righteousness shall 
rise with healing in his wings/" As he 
spoke, he looked up ; the tears still trembled 
in his eyes, whidi beamed with meek yet 
fervent devotion, and his countenance glow^ 
with the dignity of a superior being. 

" Let us not neglect these awful moments," 
said La Luc, rising ; " let our united prayers 
ascend to Him who alone can comfort and 
support us ! " 

They all knelt down, and he prayed with 
that simple and sublime eloquence which true 
piety inspires. When he rose, he embraced 
his children separately, and when he came to 
Theodore, he paused, gazed upon him with 
an earnest, mournful expression, and was for 
some time unable to sp^dc. Theodore could 
not bear this ; he drew his lumd before his 
eyes, and vainly endeavoured to sdfle the 
deep sobs which convulsed his frame. At 
length recovering his voice, he entreated his 
father would leave him. " This misery is too 
much for us all," he said, " let us not prolong 
it. The time is now drawing on — leave me 
to compose myself. The sharpness of death 
consists in ptuting with those who are d^u: 
to us ;^ when that is passed, death is dis- 
armed." 

"I will not leave you, my son," replied La 
Luc. " My poor girls shall go, but for me, I 
will be with you in your last moments." 

Theodore felt that this would be too much 
for them both, and urged every argument 
which reason could suggest to prevail with 
his father to relinquish his design. But he 
remained firm in his determination. 

" I will not suffer a selfish consideration of 
the pain I may endure," said La Luc, " to 
tempt me to desert my child when he will 
most require my support. It is my duty to 
attend you, and nothing shall withhold me." 

Theodore seized on the words of La Luc. 
"As you would that I s\\o\3\A.\ifc ^oc^'^ts.^^ 
in my last Yiour," ^d Y^a, *' \ «\Vt<5aN. ^ioax 
you wUl not be mlORSS oi w.. N.qvix ^^kskm^ * 



138 THE ROMANCE OP THE FOEEST. 

my dear fother. would subdue all my fortitude suddenly mnhBatwt ; " lie livQS 1 he lives 1" 

— would destroy what little composure I may She said no marcb bat ran to La Luo, vrho 

otherwise be able to attain. Add not to my sank in his diair, while Theodore and Oan. 

sufferings the view of your distress, but leave with one voice, caObdaa Louis to rdieve them 

me to forget, if possible, the dear parent I from the tortures of ampense, 

must quit for ever." His tears flowed anew. He proceeded to infonn tbem that he had 

I^ I^uc continued to gaze on him in silent obtained from the oonmumding officer a respite 

agony ; at length he said : " Well, be it so. for llieodore till the liiiH^s fiiriher pleasure 

If, indeed, my presence would distress you, could be known, and thism oonsequ e nce of a 

I will go." His voice was broken and letter received that moniin^ from his mother, 

interrupted. After a pause of some moments, Madame La Motte, in which she mentioned 

he again embraced Theodore. "We must some very extrao-dinary circumstanoes that 

part," said he, " we must part, but it is only had appeemed in the course of a trial lately 

lor a time— we shall soon be reunited in a conducted at Paris, and whidi so materially 

higher world. Oh God I thou seest my heart affected the nharactw of the Marquis de 

— thou seest all its feelings in this bitter Montalt as to render it pofflibte a pardon 

hour 1 " Grief again overcame him. He might be obtained for Theodore, 

pressed Theodore in his arms ; and, at These words darted with the rapidity of 

length, seeming to summon all his fortitude, lightnin|^ upon the hearts of his hearers. La 

he again said : "We must part— Oh ! my Luc revived, and that prison, so latety the 

son, fare¥rell for ever in this world! Tlie scene of despair, now echoed only to the vokcs 

mercy of Almighty God support and bless of gratitude and rladness. La Luc, raisiiig 

youi" his clasped han& to heaven, said. "Gnat 

He turned away to leave the prison, but, God, support me in this moment as thou hast 

quite worn out with grief, sank into a chair already supported me 1 If my son lives, I die 

near the door he would have opened. Theo- in peace." 

dore gased, with a distracted countenance. He embraced Theodore, and remembering 
alternately on his father, on Clara, and on the anguish ofhis last embrace, tears of thank- 
Adeline, whom he pressed to his throbbing fulness and joy flowed at the contrast So 
heart, and their tears flowed together. " And powerful, indeed, was the effect cf this tem- 
do I then," cried he. " for the last time, look poraiy reprieve, andof thehopeitinCroduoedL 
upon that countenance ? Shall I never — that if an absolute pardon had been obtained 
never more behold it ? Oh ! exquisite misery ! it could scarcely, for the momait, have diffiised 
Yet once again— once more," continued he, a more lively joy. But when the first emotions 
pressing her cheek, but it was insensible, and were subsided, the imcertainty of Theod(»e*s 
cold as marble. fate once more appeared. Adeline focfoweto 

Louis, who had left the room soon after express her sense of this, but Qara, vrithout 

I^ Luc arrived, that his presence might not scruple, lamented the possibility that her 

interrupt their farewell grief, now returned, brother might yet be taxenirom them, and 

Adeline raised her head, and perceiving who all their joy be turned to sorrow. A look 

entered, it again sank on the bosom of Theo- from Adeline checked her. Joy was, how- 

dore. ever, so much the predomhmnt feehng of the 

Louis appeared much agitated. La Luc present moment, that the shade whic£ refieo- 

arose. " We must go," said he. " Adeline, tion threw upon their hopes passed away fike 

my love, exert yourself. Clara— my children the cloud that is dispelled by the stiengih of 

— let us depart. Yet one last embrace, and the sunbeam ; and Louis alone was pensive 

then " and abstracted. 

Louis advanced and look his hand. " My When they were sufficiently composed, he 

dear sir, I have something to say, yet I fear informed them that the contents of Madame 

to tell it." La Motte's letter obliged him to set out for 

" What do you mean? " said La Luc, \\\\h Paris immediately ; and that the intelligence 

quickness; "no new misfortune can have he had to communicate intimately concerned 

power to afflict me at this moment. Do not Adeline, who would undoubtedly judge it 

fear to speak." necessary to go thither also as soon as her 

"I rejoice that I cannot put you to the health would permit. He then rdatedtohis 

proof," replied Louis; "I have seen you impatient auditors such passages in the letter 

sustain the most trjring affliction with forti- as were necessary to explain his meaning ; 

tude. Can you support the transports of but as Madame La Motte had omitted to 

'^^P® V mention some circumstances of importance to 

•^v • e^ed eagerly on Louis. "Speak," be understood, the following is a relation of 

said he, in a faint voice. Adeline raised her the occurrences that had latelv haonened at 

f '^d. and trembUng between hope and fear, Paris. ' F*'"*** «» 

iS^ui^^ V?"'^ ^ *1 "^t^ ^""^^^ ^^^^ searched It may be remembered that on the first day 

'^H^u V^^^ cheerfully upon her. of his trial. La Motte, in passinir from tS 

,/5 h-^h, is jt possible ? " she cxc^med, co>m[\.% Vi \jis ^^xSaw., W.w a ^^s!l^ Set 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



139 



ttires, thottslh imperfectly seen through the 
dusk, he thobght he recollected ; and that this 
same person, after inquiring La Motte's name, 
<lesired to be admitted to him. On the follow- 
ing day the warder complied with his request, 
and the smprise of La Motte may be imagined 
when, fai the stronger light of his apartment, 
he distinguished the countenance of the man 
from whose hands he had formerly received 
Adeline. 

On observing Madame La Motte in the 
room, he saidh^ad something of consequence 
to impart, and desired to be left alone with the 
prisoner. When she was gone, he told La 
Motte that he understood he was confined 
at the suit of the Marquis de Montalt. La 
Motte assented. 

" I know him for a villain," said the stranger 
boldly. "Your case is desperate. Do you 
^irish for life ? " 

" Need the question be asked ? " 

"Your tnal, I understand, proceeds to- 
morrow. I am now under confinement in 
this place for debt ; but if you can obtain 
leave for me to go with you into the courts, 
and a condition from the judge that what I 
reveal shall not criminate myself, I will make 
discoveries that shall confound the Marquis ; 
I will prove him a villain ; and it shall then 
be judged how far his word ought to be taken 
against you." 

La Motte, whose interest was now strongly 
excited, desired he would explain himself; 
and the man proceeded to relate a long 
history of the misfortunes and consequent 
poverty which had tempted him to become 
subservient to the schemes of the Marquis, 
tUl he suddenly checked himself, and said : 

"When I obtain from the court the promise 
I require I will explain myself fully ; till then 
I can say no more." 

La Motte could not forbear expressing a 
doubt of his sincerity, and a curiosity con- 
cerning the motive that had induced him to 
become the Marquis's accuser. 

"As to my motive, it is a very natural 
one," replied the man ; " it is no easy matter 
to receive ill-usage without resenting it, par- 
ticularly from a vUlain whom you have served." 

La Motte, for his own sake, endeavoured to 
check the vehemence with which this was 
uttered. 

" I care not who hears me," continued the 
stranger, but at the same time he lowered his 
voice : " I repeat it — the Marquis has used 
me ill — I have kept his secret long enough. 
He does not think it worth while to secure 
my silence or he would relieve my necessities. 
I am in prison for debt, and have applied to 
him for relief; since he does not choose to 
give it, let him take the consequence. I 
warrant he shall soon repent that he has pro- 
voked me, and 'tis fit he should." 

The doubts of I-a Motte were now dissi- 
pated ; the prospect of life again opened 



upon him, and he assured Du Bosse (which 
was the stranger's name), with much warmth, 
that he would commission his advocate to do 
all in his power to obtain leave for his appear^ 
ance on the trial, and to procure the necessary 
condition. After tome further conversation, 
they parted. 

CHAPTER XXL 

Drag forth the legml monster into lif ht, 
Wrench from his hand oppression's iron lod. 
And bid the cruel feel the pangs they give. 

Leave was at length granted for the appear- 
ance of Du Bosse, with a promise that his 
words should not criminate him, and he ac- 
companied La Motte into court. 

The confu.sion of the Marquis de Montalt 
on perceiving this man was observed by 
many persons present, and particularly by 
La Motte, who drew from this circumstance 
a favourable presage for himself. 

When Du Bosse was called upon he in- 
formed the court that, on the night of the 
twenty-first of April, in the preceding year, 
one Jean D'Aunoy, a man he had known 
many years, came to his lodging. After they 
had discoursed for some time on their circum- 
stances, D'Aunoy said he knew a way by 
which Du Bosse might change all his poverty 
to riches, but that he would not say more tiU 
he was certain he would be willing to follow 
it. The distressed state in which Du Bosse 
then was made him anxious to obtain some 
means of relief ; he eagerly inquired what his 
friend meant, when D'Aunoy explained him- 
self. He said he was employed by a noble- 
man (whom he afterwards told Du Bosse was 
the Marquis de Montalt) to carry off a young 
girl from a convent, and that she was to be 
taken to a house a fe%v leagues distant from 
I*aris. "I knew the house he described 
well," said Du Bosse, "for I have been there 
many times with D'Aunoy, who lived there to 
avoid his creditors, though he often passed 
his nights at Paris. He would not tell me 
more of the scheme, but said he should want 
assistants, and if I and my brother, who is 
since dead, would join him, his employer 
would gnidge no money, and we should be 
well rewarded. 1 desired him again to tell 
me more of the plan, but he was obstinate ; 
and after I had told him I would consider of 
what he said, and speak to my brother, he 
went away. 

"A\Tien he called the next night for his 
answer my brother and I agreed to engage, 
and accordingly we went home with him. 
He then told us that the young lady he was 
to bring thither was a natural daughter of the 
Marquis de Montalt and of a nun belonging 
to a convent of Ursulines ; that his wife had 
received the child immediately on its birth, 
and had been allowed a handsome anmivt^j \si 
bring it up a& \i« o^n, >)<^Ca^<^\A.^ ^csqa 



I40 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



till her death. The child was then placed in the crime to wldch he had onoe devoted hert 
a convent and designed for the veil, but when his frame thrilled with horror. He now tocdc 
she was of an age to receive the vows she had up the story, and added an account ctf wlut 
steadily {persisted in refusing them. This had passed at the abbey between the Marquis 
circumstance had so much exasperated the and himself oonoerniDg a design of the former 
Marquis that in his rage he ordered that, if upon the life of Adeline, urging, as a proof of 
she ix^rsisted in her obstinacy, she should be the present prosecution originating in malice, 
removed from the convent and got rid of any that it had commenced immediately after he 
way. since, if she lived in the world, her birth had effected her escape from the Marquis. 
might be discovered, and, in consequence of He concluded, however, with ttying that, as 
this, her mother, for whom he had yet a the Marquis had immediately sent mi peofde 
regard, would be condemned to expiate her in pursuit of her, it was possible sIm might 
crime by a terrible death." have yet fallen a victim to his vengeance. 

Du Bosse was interrupted in his narrative Here the Marquis's counsel agun inter- 
by the counsel of the Marquis, who contended fered, and their objections were again over- 
that the circumstances alleged tending;: to ruled by the court. The uncommon deigree 
criminate his client, the proceeding was both of emotion which his countenance betrayed 
irrelevant and illegal. He was answered that during the narrations of Du Basse and La 
it was not irrelevant, and therefore not illegal, Motte was generally observed. The court 
for that the circumstances which threw light suspended the sentence of the latter, oirdered 
upon the character of the Marquis affected that the Marquis should be put under inunfr< 
his evidence against La Motte. Du Bosse diate arrest, and that Adeline (the name given 
was suffered to proceed. by her foster-mother) and Jean D' Annoy should 

" D'Aunoy then said that the Marquis had be sought for. 
ordered him to despatch her, but that, as he The Marquis was accordingly sased at the 
had been used to see her from her infancy, he suit of the Crown, and put under confinement 
could not find it in his heart to do it, and till Adeline should appear, or proof could be 
wrote to tell him so. The Marquis then com- obtained that she died by his order, and UU 
manded him to find those who would, and D'Aunoy should confirm or destroy the evi- 
this was the business for whicli he wanted us. dence of La Motte. 



My brother and I w^ere not so wicked as this 
came to, and so we told D'Aunoy ; and I 
could not help asking why the Marquis re- 
solved to murder his own child rather than 
expose her mother to the risk of suffering 



Madame, who at length obtained intel- 
ligence of her son's residence firom the town 
where he was formerly stationed, had ac- 
quainted him with his other's sitaalion, and 
the proceedings of the trial; and as she 



death. He said the Marquis had never seen believed that Adeline, if she had been so for- 



his child, and that, therefore, it could not be 
supposed he felt much kindness towards it, 
and still less that he could love it better than 
he loved its mother." 

Du Bosse proceeded to relate how much he 
and his brother had endeavoured to soften 
the heart of D'Aunoy towards the Marquis's 
daughter, and that they prevailed with him 
to write again and plead for her. D'Aunoy 



to 



tunate as to escape the Marquis's pursuit, 
was still in Savoy, she desired Loms would 
obtain leave of absence, and bring her 
Paris, where her immediate presence 
requisite, to substantiate the evidence, and, 
probably, to save the life of La Motte. 

On the receipt of her letter, which hap- 
pened on the morning appointed for Ine 
execution of Theodore, Louis went imme- 



went to Paris to await the answer, leaving diately to the commanding officer, to petition 
them and the young girl at the house on the for a respite till the king's further Measure 
heath, where the former had consented to should be known. He founded his plea on 
remain, seemingly for the purpose of exe- the arrest of the Marquis, and showed the 
cuting the orders they might receive, but letter he had just received. The comman^ng 
really with a design to save the devoted victim officer readily granted a reprieve, and Louis, 
from the sacrifice. who, on the arrival of this letter, had forborne 

It is probable that Du Bosse, in this in- to communicate its contents to Theodore, 
stance, gave a false account of his motive, lest it should torture him with false hope, 
since, if he really was guilty of an intention now hastened to him with this comfortable 
so atrocious as that of murder, he would news, 
naturally endeavour to conceal it. However 
this might be, he affirmed that, on the night 
of the twenty-sixth of April, he received an 
order from D'Aunoy for the destruction of tlie 
girl, whom he had afterwards delivered into 
the hands of I^ Motte. 

La Motte 



CHAPTER XXn. 

Low on his fiin'ral couch he lie& 
No pitying hearty no eye, affcvd 
A tear to grace his obsequies. 

Gray. 
learning the purpose of Madame La 



, J , - listened to this relation in as- On _ _ 

ihe^u^Lln^Z^ knew that AdeUnc was Motte's lett"^, Adeline saw the neces'sTty "5 
"••"««*«• ot the Marquis, and remembered \i« \iQ,taft«ikax<i dei^Mture for Paris, llic life 



i 



THB 'romance of THE FOREST. \\\ 

6i La Motte, who bad more than saved hers, quitted Theodore, notwithstanding his en- 

the life, pahaM, of her beloved Theodore, treaties that she would not undertake the 

depended on the testimony she could give, journey in her present weak state, and was 

And she who had so lately been sinking under accompanied by Clara and I^ Luc to the inn. 

the influence of illness and despair, who The former parted from her friend with many 

could scarcely raise her languid head, or tears and much anxiety for her welfare, but 

speak bat fai the faintest accents, now, re- under a hope of soon meeting again. Should 

anhnated with hope, and invigorated by a a pardon be granted to Theodore, I^ Luc 

sense of the importance of the business before designed to fetch Adeline from Paris ; but 

her, prepared to perform a rapid journey of should this be refused, she was to return 

some hundred miles. with Peter. He bade her adieu with a father's 

Theodore tenderly entreated that she would kindness, which she repaid with a filial affec- 

so far ccmsider her health as to delay this tion ; and in her last words conjured him to 

journey for a few days ; but with a smile of attend to the recovery of his health. The 

enchanting tenderness she assured him that languid smile he assumed seemed to express 

she was now too happy to be ill, and that the that her solicitude was vain, and that he 

same cause which would confirm her happi- thought his health past recovery, 

ness would confirm her health. So strong Thus Adeline quitted the friends so justly 

was the effect of hope upon her mind, now dear to her, and so lately found, for Paris ; 

that it succeeded to the misery of despair, where she was a stranger, almost without 

that it overcame the shock she suffered on protection, and compelled to meet a father 

believing herself a daughter of the Marquis, who had pursued her with the utmost cruelty 

and cveiy other painful reflection. She did in a public court of justice. The carriage, in 

not evenforesee the obstacle that circumstance leaving Vaceau, passed by the prison; she 

might moduoe to her union with Theodore, threw an eager look towards it as she passed; 

should he at last be permitted to live. its heavy black walls and narrow grated 

It was settled that she should set off for windows seemed to frown upon her hopes ; 

Paris in a few hours with Louis, and attended but Theodore was there, and leaning from 

by Peter. Ttese hours were passed by La the window she continued to gaze upon it till 

Luc and his &mily in the prison. an abrupt turning in the street concealed it 

When the time of her departure arrived, from her vie>v. She then sank back in the 
the spirits of Adeline again forsook her, and carriage, and, yielding to the melancholy of 
the ilhuions of joy disappeared. She no her heart, wept in silence. Ix)uis was not 
kmger beheld Theodore as one respited from disposed to interrupt it ; his thoughts were 
death, but took leave of him with a mournful anxiously employed on his father's situation, 
presentiment that she should see him no more, and the travellers proceeded many miles with- 
So strongly was this presage impressed upon out exchanging a word. 
her mind, that it was long before she could At Paris, whither we shall now return, the 
smnmon resolution to bid him farex^ell ; and search after Jean D'Aunoy was prosecuted 
when she had done so, and even left the without success. The house on the heath, 
apartment, she returned to take of him a last described by Du Bosse, was found unin- 
look. As she was once more quitting the habited ; and to the places of his usual resort 
room,her melancholy imagination represented in the city, where the officers of the police 
Theodore at the place of execution, pale and awaited him, he no longer came. It even 
convulsed in death. She again tmned her appeared doubtful whether he was living, for 
lingering eyes upon him ; but fancy affected he had absented himself from the houses of 
her sense, for she thought, as she now gazed, his customary rendezvous some time before 
that his countenance changed and assumed a the trial of La Motte ; it was therefore certain 
ghastly hue. All her resolution vanished, and that his absence was not occasioned by any- 
such was ^e anguish of her heart that she thing which had passed in the courts. 
resolved to defer her journey till the morrow ; In the solitude of his confinement the Mar- 
though she must by this means lose the pro- quis de Montalt had leisure to reflect on the 
tection of Louis, whose impatience to meet past and to repent of his crimes; but reflection 
his father would not suffer the delay. The and repentance formed as yet no part of his 
triumph of passion, however, was transient ; disi)osition. He turned with impatience from 
soothed by the indulgence she promised her- recollections which produced only pain, and 
sdf, her grief subsided, reason assumed its looked for>\ard to the future witn an en- 
influence ; she again saw the necessity of her deavour to avert the disgrace and punishment 
immediate departure, and collected sufficient which he saw impending. The elegance of 
resolution to submit. La Luc would have his manners had so effectually veiled the 
accompanied her for the purpose of again depravity of his heart that he was a favourite 
soliciting the king in behalf of his son, had with his sovereign ; and on this circumstance 
not the weakness and lassitude to which he he rested his hope of security. He, however, 
was reduced made travelling impracticable. severely repented that he had indulged the 

At length Adeline, with a heavy heart, hasty spirit of reveu^t ^VaOdl YaA \5s^^^ ^^ 



143 



THE ROMANCE OP flf£ PORMST. 



prosecution of La Motte, and had thus unex- 
pectedly involved him in a situation dan- 
gerous — if not fatal— since, if Adeline could 
not be found, he would be concluded guilty 
of her death. But the appearance of D'Aunoy 
was 2 be circumstance he most dreaded ; and 
to oppose the possibility of this he employed 
secret emissaries to discover his retreat, and 
to bribe him to his interest. These were, 
however, as unsuccessful in their research as 
the ofhcers of police, and the Marquis at 
length began to hope the man was really 
dead. 

La Motte meamvhile awaited with trem- 
bling impatience the arrival of his son, when 
he should be relieved, in some degree, from 
his uncertainty concerning Adeline. On her 
appearance he rested his only hope of life, 
smce the evidence against him would lose 
much of its validity from the confirmation 
she would give of the bad character of his 
prosecutor ; and if the parliament even con- 
demned La Motte, the clemency of the king 
might yet operate in his favour. 

Adeline arrived at Paris after a journey of 
several days, during which she was chiefly 
supported by the delicate attention of Louis, 
whom she pitied and revered, though she 
could not love. She was immediately visited 
at the hotel by Madame La Motte ; the 
meeting was affecting on both sides. A 
sense of her past conduct excited in the 
latter an embarrassment which the delicacy 
and goodness of Adeline would willingly 
have spared her ; but the pardon solicited 
was given with so much sincerity, that 
Madame gradually became composed and 
reassured. This forgiveness, however, could 
not have been thus easily granted, had 
Adeline believed her former conduct volun- 
tary ; a conviction of the restraint and terror 
under which Madame had acted alone 
induced her to excuse the past. In this first 
meeting they forbore dwelling on particular 
subjects. Madame La Motte proposed that 
Adeline should remove from the hotel to her 
lodgings near the Chatelet, and Adeline, for 
whom a residence at a public hotel was very 
improper, gladly accepted the offer. 

Madame there gave her a circumstantial 
account of La Motte's situation, and con- 
cluded with saying, that as the sentence of 
her husband had been suspended till some 
certainty could be obtained concerning the 
late criminal designs of the Marquis, and 
Adeline could confirm the chief part of I^ 
Motte's testimony, it was probable that, now 
she was arrived, the court would proceed im- 
mediately. She now learnt the full extent of her 
Obligation to La Motte ; for she was till now 
5g?°^t that when he sent her from the 
of ?t ' ?* ^^^®^ ^er from death. Her horror 

oonsiL ^^^ u^^' ^^°"^ ^^® ^o^^^ ^^^ bear to 

ber dSL ^ ^^ father, and her gratitude to 

cretfverer, redoubled, and she became im- 



patient to 8^ the testimony so necessaiy to 
the hopes of her pres^nrer. Madame then 
said she believed it was not too late to gadn 
admittance that night to the ChAtdet; and 
as she knew how anxJonaly her fau^iand 
wished to see Addine. she entreated her con- 
sent to go thither. Addfine, thoug^h much 
harassed and fetigued, complied. When 
Louis returned from M. Nemours, his 
Other's advocate, whom he bad hastened to 
inform of her arrJyal, they all set out for the 
Ch&telet The view of the prison into which 
they were now admitted so fordbly recalled 
to Adeline's mind the situation of Theodore, 
that she with difficulty supported herself to 
the apartment of La Motte. When he saw 
her a gleam of joy passed over his counte- 
nance ; but again relapsing into despondency, 
he looked mournfully at her, and then at 
Louis, and groaned deeply. Adeline, in 
whom all reraemtomoe of his former cnidty 
H'as lost in his subsequent kindness, expressed 
her thankfulness for the life he had preserved, 
and her anxiety to serve him in warm and 
repeated terms. But her gratitude evidently 
distressed him ; instead of recondling him to 
himself, it seemed to awaken a remembrance 
of the guilty designs he had once assisted, 
and to strike the fangs of oonsdenoe deeper 
in his heart. Endeavouring to conceal his 
emotions, he entered on the subiect oi his 
present danger, and infonned Aculine what 
testimony would be required of her on the 
trial. After above an hoofs oonYersation 
with La Motte, she returned to the lodgjlnes 
of Madame, 'where, languid and HI, s& 
withdrew to her chamber, and tried to obli- 
viate her anxieties in sleep. 

The parliament which oondncted the trul 
reassembled in a few days after the auival of 
Adeline, and the two remaining witnesses of 
the Marquis, on whom he now tested his 
cause against La Motte, appeared. She was 
led trembling into the court, where almost 
the first object that met her eyes was die 
Marquis de Montalt, whom she now bdidd 
with an emotion entirely new to her, and 
which was strongly tinctured with horror. 
When Du Bosse saw her be immediately 
swore to her identity ; his testimony was 
confirmed by her manner ; for on percdving 
him she grew pale, and a universal tremor 
seized her. Jean D'Aunoy could nowhere be 
found, and La Motte was thus deprived of 
an evidence which essentially affected lus 
interest. Adeline, whea called upon, gave 
her little narrative with clearness and pre- 
cision ; and Peter, who had conveyed her 
from the abbey, supported the testimony she 
offered. The evidence produced was suffi- 
cient to criminate the Marauis of the inten- 
tion of murder in the minas of most people 
present ; but it was not sufifident to afiect 
the testimony of his last two witnesses, 
vrho positively swore to the robbery, and to 



THE ROMANCE OF THE POREST. 143 

the person of Lft Motte. on whom sentence the reward agreed upon, and In a few months 
of death was acoordhigly pronounced. On after delivered into his hands the infant 
receiving this sentence the unhappy criminal daughter of the late Marquis, whom lie con- 
fainted, and the compassion of the assembly, veyed to a distant part of the kingdom, where, 
whose feelinps had been tmusually interested assuming the name of St. Pierre, he brought 
in the dedsion, was expressed in a general her up as his own child, receiving from the 
groan. present Marquis a considerable annuity for his 

Tbdr attention was quickly called to a new secrecy, 

object— it was Jean D'Aunoy, who now entered Adeline, no longer able to struggle with the 

the cotut. But his evidence, if it could ever, emotions of her heart, uttered ii deep sigh 

indeed, have been tiie means of saving I^ and fainted. She was cairied from the court, 

Motte, came too late. He was reconducted to and, when the confusion occasioned by this 

prison ; but Adeline, who, extremely shocked circumstince subsided, Jean D'Aunoy went 

by bis sentence, was much indisposed, received on. He related that, on the death of his 

orders to remain in the court during the ex- wife, Adeline was placed in a convent, from 

amination of D'Aunoy. This man had been whence she was afterwards removed to another, 

at length found in the prison of a provincial where the Marquis had destined her to receive 

town, where some of his creditors had thrown the vows. That her determined rejection di 

him, and from which even the money which them had occasioned him to resolve upon her 

the Marquis had remitted to him, for the pur- death, and that she had accordingly been 

pose of satisfying the craving importunities of removed to the house on the heath. D Aunoy 

Du Bosse, had been insufficient to release added that, by the Marquis's order, he had 

him. Meanwhile the revenge of the latter misled Du Bosse with a false story of her 

had bem roused against the Marquis by an birth. Having discovered that his comrades 

imaginary n^lect, and the money, which was had deceived hnn concerning her death, 

designed to relieve his necessities, was spent D'Aunoy separated from them in enmity ; 

by D'Aunoy in riotous luxury. but they unanimously determined to conceal 

He was confronted with Adeline and with her escape from the Marquis, that they might 
Du Bosse, and ordered to confess all he knew enjoy the recompense of their supposed crime, 
concerning this niysterious affair, or to imder- Some months subsequent to this period, how- 
TO the torture. D'Aunoy, who was ignorant e\'er, D'Aunoy received a letter from the Mar- 
How far the suspicions concerning the Mar- quis, charging him with the truth, and pro- 
quis extended, and was conscious that his own mising him a large reward if he would confess 
words might condemn him. remained for where he had placed Adeline. In conse- 
some time obstinately silent ; but when the quence of this letter, he acknowledged that 
question was administered his resolution gave she had been given into the hands of a 
way, and he confessed a crime, of which he stranger ; but who he was, or where he lived, 
had not even been suspected. was not known. 

It appeared that, in the year 1642, D'Aunoy, Upon these depositions Philippe de Montalt 
togetber Mrith one Jacques Martigny and was committed to take his trial for the murder 
Francis Balliere, had waylaid and seized of Henry, his brother ; D'Aunoy was thrown 
Henry Marquis de Montalt, half-brother to into a dungeon of the Chitelet, and Du Bosse 
HiUippe ; and after having robbed him and was bound to appear as evidence. 
bound his servant to a tree, according to the The feelings of the Marquis, who, in a pro- 
orders they had received, they conveyed him secution stimulated by revenge, had thus un- 
to the Abbejr ^ St. Clair, in the distant forest expectedly Exposed his crimes to the public 
of FontanviIIe. Here he was confined for eye, and betrayed himself to justice, can 
some time^ till further directions were received only be imagined. The passions which had 
from Philippe de Montalt, the present Marquis, tempted him to the commission of a crime so 
who was then on his estates in a northern horrid as that of murder — and what, if pos- 
province of France. These orders were for sible, heightened its atrocity, the murder of 
death, and the unfortunate Henry was assas- one connected with him by the ties of blood, 
sinated in his chamber, in the third week of and by habits of even infantine association — 
his confinement in the abbey. the passions which had stimulated him to so 

On hearing this Adeline grew faint ; she monstrous a deed were ambition and the love 

remembered the MS. she had found, together of pleasure. The first was more immediately 

with the extraordinary circumstances that had gratified by the title of his brother ; the latter 

attended the discovery ; every nerve thrilled by the riches which would enable him to in- 

with horror, and, raising her eyes, she saw the dulge his voluptuous inclinations, 

countenance of the Marquis overspread with The late Marquis de Montalt, the father of 

the livid paleness of guilt. She endeavoured, Adeline, received from his ancestors a patri- 

however, to arrest her spirits while the man monyveryinadequate to support the splendour 

made his confession. of his rank ; but he had married the heiress 

When the murder was perpetrated D'Aunoy of an illustrious family, whose fortune amply 

had returned to his employer, who gave him supplied the deficiency of his own. He hail 



144 



THE ROMANCE OP THE FOREST 



the misfortune to lose her, for she was amiable 
and beautiful, soon after the birth of a 
daughter, and it was then that the present 
Marquis formed the diabolical design of 
destroying his brother. The contrast of their 
characters prevented that cordial regard 
between them which their near relationship 
seemed to demand. Henry was bene\'olent, 
mild, and contemplative. In his heart reigned 
the love of virtue ; in his manners the strict- 
ness of justice v^'as tempered, not weakened, 
by mercy ; his mind was enlarged by science 
and adorned by elegant literature. The 
character of Pliilippe has been already de- 
lineated in his actions ; its nicer shades were 
blended with some shining tints ; but these 
served only to render more striking, by contrast, 
the general darkness of the portmit. 

He had married a lady who, by the death 
of herbrother, inherited considerable estates, of 
which the Abbey of St. Clair, and the villa on 
the borders of the forest of Fontanville, were 
the chief. His passion for magnificence and 
dissipation, however, soon involved him in 
difficulties, and pointed out to him the con- 
veniency of possessing his brother's wealth. 
His brother and his infant daughter only 
stood between him and his wishes ; how he 
removed the father has been already related ; 
why he did not employ the same means to 
secure the child seems somewhat surprising, 
unless we admit that a destiny hung over him 
on this occasion, and that she was suffered to 
live as an instrument to punish the murderer 
of her parent. Allien a retrospect is taken 
of the vicissitudes and dangers to whicli she 
had been exposed from her earliest infancy, it 
appears as if her presen'ation was the effect 
of something more than human policy, and 
affords a striking instance that justice, how- 
ever long delayed, will overtake the guilty. 

While the late unhappy Marquis was 
suffering at the abbey, his brother, who, to 
avoid suspicion, remained in the north of 
France, delayed the execution of his horrid 
purpose from a timidity natiu^ to a mind 
not yet inured to enormous guilt. Before he 
dared to deliver his final orders, he waited to 
know whether the story he contrived to pro- 
pagate of his brother's death would veil liis 
crime from suspicion. It succeeded but too 
well ; for the servant, whose life had been 
spared that he might relate the tale, naturally 
enough concluded that his lord ^lad been 
murdered by banditti ; and the peasant, who, 
a few hours after, found the ser\'ant wounded, 
bleeding, and bound to a tree, and knew also 
that this spot was infested by robbers, as 
naturally believed him, and spread the report 
accordingly. 

From this period the Marquis, to whom 
the Abbey of St. Clair belonged, in right of 
his wife, visited it only twice, and that at dis- 
tant times, till, after an interval of several 
^'cars, he accidentally Jound La Motte its 



inhaUtant. He resided at Paris and on his 
estate in the north, except that once a year 
he usually passed a month at his ddightful 
villa on the borden of the forest. In the busy 
scenes of the court, and in the dissipations of 
pleasure, he tried to lose the leni e m brance of 
his guilt ; but there wa« times when the voice 
of consdenoe would be heard, thoogh it was 
soon again lost in the tumnlt of tlie 
world. 

It is probable that, on the mght of his 
abrupt departure from the abbey, the solitary 
silence and gloom of the hour, in a place 
which had b^n the scene of his former crime, 
called up the remembrance of his brother 
with a force too powerful for fancy, and 
awakened horrors which compelled him to 
quit the polluted spot. 

If it were so, it is however certain that the 
spectres of conscience \'a]uahed with the 
darkness, for on the following day he re- 
turned to the abbc^, though, it may be ob- 
served, he never attempted to pass another 
night there. But though terror was roused 
for a transient moment, neith^ pity nor re- 
pentance succeeded, since, when the dis- 
covery of Adeline's birth excited appiehen- 
sion for his own life, he did not hesitate to 
repeat the crime, and would again ha\'e 
stained his soul with human blood. This 
discovery was effected by means of a seal, 
bearing the anns of her mother's £unUy, 
which was impressed on tlw note his servant 
had found <uid had ddivcrcd to him at Caux. 
It may be lemembered that, having read this 
note, he was throwing it from bim In the fury 
of jealousy, but thait, after examining it s^;ain, 
it was carefully deposited in his pocket- 
book. 

The violent agitation whidi a suspidon of 
tliis terrible truth occasioned deprived Um 
for a while of all power to act. 

When he was well enough to write he des- 
patched a letter to D'Aunoy, the purport of 
which has been already mentioned. Ftaa 
D'Aunoy he received the confirmation of his 
fear. Knowing that his Ufe must pay the 
forfeiture of his crime should Adeline ever 
obtain a knowledge of her birth, and not 
daring again to confide in the secxecy of a 
man who had once deceived him, he resolved, 
after some deliberation, on her death. He 
immediately set out for the abbey, and gave 
those directions concerning her whidi terror 
for his own safety, still more than a desire of 
retaining her estates, suggested. 

As the history of the seal which revealed 
the birth of Adeline is rather remarkable, it 
may not be amiss to mention that it was 
stolen from the Marquis, together with a 
gold watch, by Jean D'Aunoy ; the watch 
was soon disposed of, but the seal had been 
kept as a pretty trinket by his wife, and at 
her death went with Adeline among her 
clothes to the convent. Addine had care- 



THE ROMANCE OF THE J^REST. 



«45 



fully preserved it because it had once be- 
longed to the woman whom she believed to 
have been ber mother, 



CHAPTER XXIII. 
While affidou doubt distracts the tortur'd heart. 

We now return to the course of the narrative 
and to Adeline, who was carried from tlic 
court to the lodging of Madame La Motte. 
^ladame was, however, at the Ch&telct with 
her husband, suflfering all the distress which 
the sentence pronounced against him might 
be supposed to inflict. The feeble frame of 
AdeUne, so long harassed by grief and fatigue, 
almost sank under the agitation which the 
discovery of her birth excited. Her feelings 
on this occasion were too complex to be 
analysed. From an orphan, subsisting on 
the bounty of others, without family, with 
few friends, and pursued by a cruel and 
powerful enemy, she saw herself suddenly 
transformed to the daughter of an illustrious 
house, and the heiress of great wealth. But 
she learned also that her father had been 
murdered — murdered in the prime of his days 
— ^mcurdered by means of his brother, against 
whom she must now appear, and. in punish- 
ing the destroyer of her parent, doom her 
uncle to death. 

When she remembered the manuscript so 
singularly found, and considered that when 
she wept to the sufferings it described, her 
tears had flowed for those of her father, her 
emotion cannot easily be imagined. The cir- 
cumstances attending the discovery of these 
papers no longer appeared to be a work of 
diance, but of a Power whose designs are 
great and just. " Oh my father 1 " she would 
endaim, "yoiu: last wish is fulfilled — the 
piwin|^ heart you wished might trace yoiu: 
suffenngs shall avenge them." 

On the return of Madame La Motte, Ade- 
line endeavoured, as usual, to suppress her 
own emotions, that she might soothe the 
affliction of her friend. She related what had 
passed in the court after the departure of 
La Motte, and thus caused, even in the 
sorrowful heart of Madame, a momentary 
gleam of satisfaction. Adeline determined to 
recover, if possible, the manuscript. On 
inquiry, she learned that La Motte. in the 
confusion of his departure, had left it among 
other things at the Abbey. This circumstance 
much distressed her ; the more so, because 
she believed its appearance might be of 
importance on the approaching trial ; she 
determined, however, if she should recover 
ber rights, to have the manuscript sought for. 

In the evening Louis joined this mournful 
party ; he came immediately from his father, 
whom he left more tranquil than he had been 
since the fatal sentence was pronounced. 
After a silent and melancholy supper, they 



separated for the night, and Adeline, in the 
solitude of her chamber. !iad leisure to me- 
cUtate on the discoveries of this eventful day. 
The sufferings of her dead father, such as she 
had read them recorded by his own hand, 
pressed most forcibly to her thouglils. The 
narrative had formerly so much affected her 
heart and interested her imagination, that 
her memory now faithfully reflected cacli 
particular circumstance they disclosed. Hut 
when she considered that she liad been in the 
very chamber where her i)arcnt had suffered, 
where even his life liad been sacrificed , and 
that she had probably seen the very dagger — 
seen it stained with rust, the rust of blood ! — 
by which he had fallen, t!ie anguish and 
horror of her mind defied all control. 

On the following day Adeline received orders 
to prepare for the prosecution of the Marquis 
de Montalt, which was to commence as soon 
as the requisite witnesses could be collected. 
Among these were the abljess of the convent, 
who had received her from the hands of 
D Aunoy ; Madame La Motte, who was 
present when Du Dossc compelled her hus* 
band to receive Adeline *. and Peter, who had 
not only been witness to this circumstance, 
but who had conveyed her from the abbey, 
that she might escape the designs of the 
Marquis. \jx Motte and Theodore I^ Luc 
were incapacitated, by the sentence of the law, 
from appearing on the trial. 

When La Motte was informed of the dis* 
covery of Adeline's birth, and that her father 
had been murdered at the Abbey of St. Clair, 
he instantlv remembered, and mentioned to his 
wife, the skeleton he found in the stone-room 
leading to the subterranean cells. Neither of 
them doubted, from the situation in which it 
lay hid in a chest in an obscure room strongly 
guarded, that La Motte had seen the re- 
mains of the late Marquis. Madame, however, 
determined not to shock Adeline with the 
mention of this cu-cumstance till it should be 
necessary to declare it on the trial. 

As the time of this trial drew near, the dis* 
tress and agitation of Adeline increased. 
Though justice demanded the life of the 
murderer, and though the tenderness and 
pity which the idea of her father called forth 
urged her to avenge his death, she could not 
without horror consider herself as the instru- 
ment of dispensing that justice which would 
deprive a fellow-being of existence ; and there 
were times when she wished the secret of her 
birth had never been revealed. If this sensi- 
bility (was, in her peculiar circumstances, a 
weakness, it was at least an amiable one, and 
as such deserves to be reverenced. 

The accounts she received from Vaceau of 
the health of M. La Luc did not contribute to 
tranquillise her mmd. The symptoms de- 
scribed by Clara seemed to say that he was 
in the last stage of a consumption, and th& 
grief of Theodote wxdYi'^i?^^ ^ix^iia&QRRaatfsw 



146 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



was expressed in her letters with the lively 
eloquence so natural to her. Adeline loved 
and revered La Luc for his own worth and 
for the parental tenderness he had shown her, 
but he was still dearer to her as the father df 
Theodore, and her concern for his declining state 
was not inferior to that of his children. It 
\vas increased by the reflection that she had 
probably been the means of shortening his 
life ; for she too well knew that the distress 
occasioned him by the situation in which it 
had been her misfortune to involve Theodore, 
had shattered his frame to its present infirmity. 
The same cause also withheld him from seek- 
ing in the climate of Montpellier the relief he 
had formerly been taught to expect there. 
When she looked round on the condition of 
her friends, her heart was almost overwhelmed 
with the prospect ; it seemed as if she was 
destined to involve all those most dear to her 
in calamity. With respect to La Motte, 
whatever were his vices, and whatever the 
designs in which he had formerly engaged 
against her, she forgot them all in the service 
he had finally rendered her, and considered it 
to be as much her duty as she felt it to be her 
inclination to intercede for him. This, how- 
ever, in her present situation she could not do 
with any hope of success ; but if the suit upon 
which depended the re-establishment of her 
rank, her fortune, and consequently her in- 
fluence, should be decided in her favour, she 
determined to throw herself at the king's feet, 
and when she pleaded the cause of Theodore, 
ask the life of La Motte. 

A few days preceding that of the trial, 
Adeline was informed a stranger desired to 
speak with her, and on going to the room 
where he was, she found M. Verneuil. Her 
countenance expressed both surprise and satis- 
faction at this unexpected meeting, and she 
inquired, though with little expectation of an 
afl&rmative, if he had heard of M. La Luc. 

" I have seen nim," said M. Verneuil ; •• I 
am just come from Vaceau. But I am sorry 
I cannot give you a better account of his 
health. He is greatly altered since I saw him 
before." 

Adeline could scarcely refrain from tears at 
the recollection these words revived of the 
calamities which had occasioned this lamented 
change. M. Verneuil delivered her a packet 
from Clara ; as he presented it he said, " Be- 
side this introduction to your notice, I have a 
claim of a different kind, which I am proud to 
assert, and which will, perhaps, justify the 
permission I ask of speaking upon your affairs. " 
Adeline bowed, and M. Verneuil, with a 
countenance expressive of the most tender 
solicitude, added, that he had heard of the 
late proceeding of the parliament of Paris and 
of the discoveries that so intimately concerned 
ber, "//moik not," continued he, "whether. 
I ought ro congratulate or condole with you. 
oa this trying (?ccasfQn, That I sincerely 



sympathise in all that concerns you, I hope 
you will believe ; and I cannot deny myself 
the pleasure of telling you that I am related, 
though distantly, to the late Marchioness, 
yoiu: mother ; for that she was your mother 
I cannot doubt." 

Adeline rose hastily, and advanced towards 
M. Verneuil ; surprise and sati^Eu:tion re- 
animated her features. " Do I, indeed, see 
a relation ? " said she in a sweet and tremu- 
lous voice, " and one whom I can \7dc0me 
as a friend?" Tears trembled in ho: eyes ; 
and she received M. Vemeuil's embrace in 
silence. It was some time before her emo- 
tion would permit her to speak. 

To Adeline, who from the earliest infancy 
had been abandoned to strangers — a forlorn 
and helpless orphan who had never till lately 
known a relation, and who then fimmd one in 
the person of an inveterate enemy— to her this 
discovery was as deUghtful as imezpected. 
But after struggling for some time frith the 
various emotions that pressed upon her heart, 
she begged M. Vemeuil's permission to ¥rith- 
draw till she could recover her o(xnposure. 
He would have taken leave, but she entreated 
him not to go. 

The interest which M. Verneuil took in the 
concerns of La Luc, which was strengthened 
by his increasing regard for Claia, had drawn 
him to Vaceau, where he was informed of the 
family and peculiar circumstances of Adeline. 
On receiving this intelligence, he immec^t^ 
set out for Paris, to offer his protection and 
assistance to his newly-discovered relation, 
and to aid, if possible, the cause of Theodore. 

Adeline in a short time returned, and could 
then bear to converse on the subject of her 
family. M. Verneuil ofifered her his support 
and assistance, if they should be found neces- 
sary. " But I trust,'* added he, " to the just- 
ness of your cause, and hope it will not 
require any adventitious aid. To those who 
remember the late Marchioness, your features 
bring sufficient evidence of your birth. As a 
proof that my judgment in this instance is not 
biassed by prejudice, the resemblance struck 
me when I was in Savoy, though I knew the 
Marchioness only by her portrait ; and I 
believe I mentioned to M. La Luc that ^ou 
often reminded me of a dece^ed relation. 
You may form some judgment of this your- 
self," added M. Verneuil, taking a miniature 
from his pocket ; "this was your amiable 
mother." 

Adeline's countenance changed ; she re- 
ceived the picture eagerly, gazed on it Sox a 
long time in silence, and her eyes filled with 
tears. It was not the resemblance she studied, 
but the countenance — the mild and b&iutiful 
countenance of her parent ; whose blue eyes, 
full of tender sweetness, seemed bent upon hers, 
while a soit smile played on her lips. Adeline 
pressed the picture to hers, and again gazed 
ia sVkuV. te.Nti\e^ M length, with a deqt sigh, 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST, 



147 



she said, " Thb fimly was my mother. Had 
she but lived, oh, my poor father ! you had 
been ^qpared." This renection quite overcame 
her, and she burst into tears. M. Verneuil 
did not interrupt her grief, but took her hand 
and sat l^ ho:, witnout speaking, till slie 
became more composed. Again kissing the 
picture, she held it out to hira with a hesitat- 
ing look. 

'' No," said be, " it is already with its true 
owner." 

She thanked him with a smile of ineffable 
sweetness ; and after some conversation on 
the subject of the approaching trial, on which 
occasi<m i^e requested M. Verneuil would 
support her by his presence, he withdrew, 
having begged leave to repeat his visit on the 
following day. 

Adeline now opened her packet, and saw 
oooe more the well-known characters of 
Theodore. For a moment she felt as if in 
his presence, and the conscious blush over- 
si;Mread her cheek ; with a trembling hand she 
broke the seal, and read the tenderest as- 
surances and solicitudes of his love ; she often 
paused, that she might prolong the sweet 
emotions which these assurances awakened ; 
but whjle tears of tenderness stood trembling 
on her eydids, the bitter recollection of his 
situation would return, and they fell in anguish 
on her bosom. 

He congratulated her, and with peculiar 
delicacy, on the prospects of life which were 
opening to her ; said everything that might 
tend to animate and support her, but avoided 
dwelling on his own circumstances except by 
expressing his sense of the zeal and kindness 
of bis commanding officer, and adding that 
he did not despair of finally obtaining a 
pardon. 

This hope, though but faintly expressed, 
and written evidently for the purpose of con- 
soling Adeline, did not entirely fail of the de- 
sired e£fect. She yielded to its enchanting 
iod&uence, and forgot for a while the many 
subjects of care and anxiety which surrounded 
her. Theodore said little of his father's 
health ; what he did say was by no means so 
discouraging as the accounts of Clara, who, 
less anxious to conceal a truth that must 
give pain to Adeline, expressed, without re- 
serve, all her apprehension and concern. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

Heaven b just ! 
And when the measure of his crimes is full. 
Will bare its red right arm, and launch its lightnings. 

5Iason. 

The day of the trial so anxiously awaited, 
and on which the fate of so many persons 
depended, at length arrived. Adeline, ac- 
companied by M. verneuil and Madame La 
Motte, a]^)eared as the prosecutor of the 



Marquis dc Montalt ; and D' Annoy, Du Bosse, 
Louis La Motte, and several other persons, 
as witnesses in her cause. Tlic judges were 
some of the most distinguished in IVance ; 
and the advocates on both sides men of 
eminent abilities. On a trial of such im- 
portance, the court, as may be imagined, 
was crowded with persons of distinction, and 
the spectacle it presented was strikingly 
solemn yet magnificent. 

When she appeared before the tribunal, 
Adeline's emotion surpassed all the arts of 
disguise, but adding to the natural dignity of 
her air an expression of soft timidity, and 
to her downcast eyes a sweet confusion, it 
rendered her an object still more interesting ; 
and she attracted the universal pity and ad- 
miration of the assembly. When she ventured 
to raise her eyes, she perceived that the Mar- 
quis was not yet in the court, and while she 
awaited his appearance in trembling expec- 
tation, a confused murmuring rose in a distant 
part of the hall. Her spirits now almost for- 
sook her ; the certainty of seeing immediately 
and consciously the murderer of her father 
chilled her with horror, and she was with 
difficulty presen'ed from fainting. A low 
sound now ran through the court, and an air 
of confusion appeared, which was soon com- 
municated to the tribunal itself. Several of 
the members arose, some left the hall, the 
whole place exhibited a scene of disorder, and 
a report at length reached Adeline that the 
Marquis de Montalt was dying. A consider- 
able time elapsed in uncertainty ; but the con- 
fusion continued ; the Miirtjuis did not api>ear ; 
and at Adeline's desire M. Verneuil went in 
quest of more positive information. 

He followed a crowd which was hurrying 
towards the ChA.telet, and with some difficulty 
gained admittance into the prison ; but the 
porter at the gate, whom he had bribed for a 
passport, could give him no certain informa- 
tion on the subject of his inquiry, and, not 
being at liberty to quit his post, furnished 
M. Verneuil with only a vague direction to 
the Marquis's apartment. The courts were 
silent and deserted, but, as he advanced, a 
distant hum of voices led him on, till, per- 
ceiving several persons running towards a 
staircase which appeared beyond the archway 
of a long passage, he followed thither, and 
learned that the Marquis was certainly dying. 
The staircase was filled with people ; he en- 
deavoured to press through the crowd, and, 
after much struggle and difficulty, he reached 
the door of an anteroom which communi- 
cated with the apartment where the Marquis 
lay, and whence several persons now issued. 
Here he learned that the object of his inquiry 
was already dead. M. Verneuil, however, 
pressed through the anteroom to the cham- 
ber, where lay the Marquis on a bed sur- 
rounded by officecs ol xJcv^ \a.Ns ^tA v^ci 
noXaiies, vjYio ap^^eax^ Vi XvK^^'^oe^xv v^v'^* 



148 



THE ROMANCE OP THE FOREST. 



down depositions. His countenance was 
suffused with a black and deadly hue, and 
impressed with the horrors of death. M. Ver- 
neuil turned away, shocked by the spectacle, 
and, on inquiry, heard that the Marquis had 
died by poison. 

It appeared that, convinced he had nothing 
to hope from his trial, he had taken this 
method of avoiding an ignominious death. 
In the last hours of life, while tortured with 
the remembrance of his crime, he resolved to 
make all the atonement that remained for 
him, and having swallowed the potion, he 
immediately sent for a confessor to take a full 
confession of his guilt, and two notaries, and 
thus established Adeline beyond dispute in 
the rights of her birth, also bequeathing her a 
considerable legacy. 

In consequence of these depositions she 
was soon after formally acknowledged as the 
daughter and heiress of Henry Marquis de 
Montalt, and the rich estates of her father 
were restored to her. She immediately threw 
herself at the feet of the king in behalf of 
Theodore and of La Motte. The character 
of the former, the cause in which he had 
risked his life, and the occasion of the late 
Marquis's enmity towards him, were circum- 
stances so notorious and so forcible that it 
was more than probable the monarch would 
have granted his pardon to a pleader less 
irresistible than was Adeline de Montalt. 
Theodore La Luc not only received an ample 
pardon, but, in consideration of his gallant 
conduct towards Adeline, he was soon after 
raised to a post of considerable rank in the 
army. 

For La Motte, who had been condemned 
for the robbery on full evidence, and who had 
been also charged \vith the crime which had 
formerly compelled him to quit Paris, a 
pardon could not be obtained ; but at the 
earnest supplication of Adeline, and in con- 
sideration of the service he had finally ren- 
dered her, his sentence was softened from 
death to banishment. This indulgence, how- 
ever, would have availed him little had not 
the noble generosity of Adeline silenced other 
prosecutions that were preparing against him, 
and bestowed on him a sum more than suffi- 
cient to support his family in a foreign country. 

This kindness operated so powerfully upon 
his heart, which had been betrayed through 
weakness rather than natural depravity, and 
awakened so keen a remorse for the injuries 
he had once meditated against a benefactress 
so noble, that his former habits became odious 
to him, and his character gradually recovered 
the hue which it would probably always have 
worn, had he never been exposed to the 
tempting dissipations of Paris. 

The passion which Louis had so long 
owned for Adeline was raised almost to 
adoration by ber late conduct ; but he now 
reiiaqmshed even the faint hope which he 



had hitherto almost unconsciously cherished, 
and, since the life which was granted to Theo« 
dore rendered this sacrifice necessary, he could 
not repine. He resolved, however, to seek in 
absence the tranquillity he had lost, and to 
place his futiu'e happiness on that of two per- 
sons so deservedly dear to hinu 

On the eve of his departure La Motte and 
his family took a very affecting leave of Ade- 
line. He left Paris for England, where it 
was his design to settle, and Louis, who was 
eager to fly from her enchantments, set out 
on the same day for his regiment. 

Adeline remained some time at Paris to 
settle her affairs, where she was introduced 

by M. V to the few and distant relations 

that remained of her family. Among these 

were the Count and Countess D and M. 

Amand, who had so much engaged her pity 
and esteem at Nice. The lady, whose death 
he lamented, was of the family of De Montalt, 
and the resemblance which he had traced be- 
tween her features and those of Adeline, her 
cousin, was something more than the effect 
of fancy. The death of his elder brother had 
abruptly recalled him from Italy, but Adeline 
had the satisfaction to observe, that the heavy 
melancholy which formerly oppressed him, 
had yielded to a sort of placid resignation, 
and that his countenance was often enlivened 
by a transient gleam of cheerfulness. 

The Count and Countess D , who were 

much interested by her goodness and beauty, 
invited her to make their hotel her residence 
while she remained at Paris. 

Her first care was to have the remains of 
her parent removed from the Abbey of St, 
Clair, and deposited in the vault of his 
ancestors. 

D'Aunoy was tried, condemned, and hanged 
for the murder. At the place of execution 
he described the spot where the remains of 
the Marquis were concealed, which was in 
the stone-room already mentioned, t)e]onging 

to the abbey. M. V accompanied the 

officers appointed for the search, and at- 
tended the ashes of the Marquis to St, Maur, 
an estate in one of the northern provinces. 
There they were deposited with the solemn 
funereal pomp becoming his rank. Adeline 
attended as chief mourner, and, this last 
duty paid to the memory of her parent, she 
became more tranquil and resigned. The 
MS. tliat recorded his sufferings had been 
found at the abbey, and delivered to her by 

M. V , and she preserved it with the 

pious enthusiasm so sacred a relic deserved. 

On her return to Paris, Theodore La Luc, 
who was come from Montpellier, awaited her 
arrival. The happiness of this meeting was 
clouded by the account he brought of his 
father, whose extreme danger had alone with- 
held him from hastening, the moment he 
oblained his liberty, to thank Adeline for the 
Aiie she h&d ^xq^x\«^« ^<& ^oohi t^oeived him 



TnE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



149 



as the friend to whom she was indebted for 
her preservation, and as the lover who de- 
served and possessed her tendcrest affection. 
The rememDrance of the circumstances under 
which they had last met, and of their mutual 
anguish, rendered more exquisite the hap- 
piness of the present moments, when no longer 
oppressed by the horrid prospect of igno- 
minkjus death and final separation, they looked 
forward only to the smiling days that awaited 
them, when hand in hand they should tread 
the flowery scenes of life. The contrast 
which memory gave of the past with the 
present frequently drew tears of tenderness 
and gratitude to their eyes, and the sweet 
smile which seemed stntggling to dispel from 
the countenance of Adeline those gems of 
sorrow, penetrated the heart of Theodore, 
and In-ought to his recollection a little song, 
which in other circumstances he had formerly 
sung to her. He took up a lute that lay on 
the table, and, touching the dulcet chords, 
accompanied it with the following words : 

SONG. 

The rose that weeps with morning dew, 

Ai^ glitters in tne sunny ray, 
In tean of smiles resembles you, 

When Love breaks Sorrow's cloud away. 

The dews that bend the blushing flow'r. 
Enrich the scent — renew the glow ; 

So Love-s sweet tears exalt his pow'r, 
So bliss more brightly shines oy woe 

Her affection for Theodore had induced 
Adeline to reject several suitors, which her 
goodness, beauty, and wealth had already 
attracted, and who, though infinitely his 
superiors in point of fortune, were many of 
them inferior to him in family, and all of them 
in merit. 

The various and tumultuous emotions 
which the late events had called forth in the 
bosom of Adeline, were now subsided ; but 
the memory of her father still tinctured her 
mind with a melancholy that time could only 
subdue ; and she refused to listen to the sup- 
plications of Theodore till the period she had 
prescribed for her mourning should be expired. 
The necessity of rejoining his regiment obliged 
him to leave Paris within the fortnight after 
his arrival ; but he carried with him the 
assurance of receiving her hand soon after she 
should lay aside her sable habit, and left 
therefore with tolerable composure. 

M. La Luc's very precarious state was a 
source of incessant disquietude to Adeline, 

and she determined to accompany M. V , 

who was now the declared lover of Clara, to 
Montpellier, whither La Luc had immedi- 
ately gone on the liberation of his son. For 
this journey she was preparing, when she re- 
ceived from her friend a flattering account of 
his amendment ; and as some further settle- 
ment of her affairs required her presence at 



Paris, she deferred her design, and M. V 

departed alone. 

When Theodore's affairs assumed a more 
favourable as|)ect, M. Vcmeuil had written 
to I^ Luc, and communicated to him the 
.«yecret of his heart resixicting Clara. l^ 
Luc, who admired and esteemed M. V -, 
and was not ignorant of his family connec- 
tions, was pleased with the proposed alliance ; 
Clara thought she had never seen the person 
whom she was so much inclined to love ; and 

M. V received an answer favourable to 

his wishes, and which encoumged him to under- 
take the present journev to Montpellier. 

The restoration of his happiness and the 
climate of Montpellier did all for the health 
of I^ Luc that his most anxious friends 
could wish, and he was at length so far re- 
covered as to visit Adeline at her estate of 

St. Maur. Clara and M. V accompanied 

him, and a cessation of hostilities tx:twccn 
France and Spain soon after permitted Theo- 
dore to join this happy party. When La 
Luc, thus restored to those most dear to him, 
looked back on the miseries he had escaped, 
and forward to the blessings that awaited 
him, his heart dilated with emotions of 
exquisite joy and gratitude, and his venerable 
countenance, softened by an expression of 
complacent delight, exhibited a perfect pictiure 
of happy age. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

Last came Joy's ecstatic trial : 

They would have thought who heard the strain, 

They saw in Tempe's vale her native maids 

Amidst the festal sounding shades, 

To some unweary'd minstrel dancing, 

"WTiile as his flying fingers kiss'd the strings, 

Love fram'd with Mirth a gay fantastic rour 



roun 
Passions. 



Adeline, in the society of friends so be- 
loved, lost the impression of that melancholy 
which the fate of her parent had occasioned; 
she reco\'ered all her natural vivacity ; and 
when she threw off the mourning habit 
which filial piety had required her to assume, 
she gave her hand to Theodore. The 
nuptials, which were celebrated at St. Maur, 
were graced by the presence of the Count 

and Countess D , and La Luc had the 

supreme felicity of confirming on the same 
day the flattering destinies of both his 
children. Wlien the ceremony was over, he 
blessed and embraced them all with tears of 
fatheriy affection. "I thank thee, O God! 
that I have been permitted to see this hour," 
said he ; " whenever it shall please Thee to 
call me hence, I will depart in peace." 

"Long, very long, may you be spared to 
bless your children, ' replied Adeline. 

Clara Idssed her father's hand and wept : 
" Long, very long I" shft i«^«».\rA. Ssi-^^wi^ 
scarcely avwiibVs. 



ISO 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



La Luc smiled cheerfully, and turned the pleasures ; and Theodore, often looking from 



discourse to a subject less affecting. 

But the time now drew nigh when La Luc 
thought it necessary to return to the duties of 
his parish, from which he had so long been 
absent. Madame La Luc, too, who had 
attended him during the period of his danger 



the windows, caught with patriotic enthu- 
siasm the magnificent and changing scenery 
which the receding mountains successively 
disclosed. 

It was evening when they approadied 
within a few miles of Lelencourt, and the 



at Montpellier, and thence returned to Savoy, road, winding round the foot of a stupendous 

complained much of the solitude of her life ; crag, presented them a full view of the lake, 

and this was with her brother an additional and of the peaceful dwelling of La Luc. An 

motive for speedy departure. Theodore and exclamation of joy from the whole party an- 

Adeline, who could not support the thought nounced the discovery, and the gUuioe of 

of a separation from this venerable parent, pleasure was reflected from every eye. The 

endeavoured to persuade him to give up his sun's last light gleamed upon the water that 

ch&teau, and to reside with them in France ; reposed in " crystal purity ' below, meIlo>ved 

but he was held by strong ties to Lelencourt. every feature of the landscape, and touched 

For many years he had constituted the com- with purple splendour the douds that rolled 

fort and happiness of his parishioners ; they along the mountain-tops, 

revered and loved him as a father, he regarded La Luc welcomed his family to his happy 

them with almost parental affection. The home, and sent Up a silent thank^ving thiat 

attachment they discovered towards liim on he was permitted thus to return to it. Ade- 

his departure was not forgotten either ; it line continued to gaze upon each well-known 

made a deep impression on his mind, and he object, and again reflecting on the vicissitudes 

could not bear the thought of forsaking them of grief and joy, and the surprising change of 

now that heaven had showered on him his or tune , which she had experienced since last 



abundance. "It is sweet to live for them," 
said he, •* and I will also die amongst them." 
A sentiment of a still more tender nature 
(and let not the stoic profane it with the name 
of weakness, or the world scorn it as un- 



she saw them, her heart dikted with gratitude 
and complacent ddight. She looked at Theo- 
dore, whom, in these very scenes she had 
lamented as lost to her for ever ; who, when 
found again, was about to be torn from her 



natural), a sentiment still more tender attracted by an ignominious death, haX who now sat 

him to Lelencourt — the remains of his wife by her side, her seciu^ and happy husband, 

reposed there. the pride of his family and hersett ; and while 

Since La Luc would not reside in France, the sensibility of her heart flowed in tears from 

Theodore and Adeline, to whom the splendid her eyes, a smile of indSable tenderness told 



him all she felt. He gently pressed her hand, 
and answered her wiUi a look of love. 

Peter, who now rode up to the carnage 
with a face full of joy and of importance, in- 
terrupted a course of sentiment which was 



gaieties that courted them at Paris were very 
inferior temptations to the sweet domestic 
pleasures and refined society which Lelen- 
court would afford, determined to accom- 
pany La Luc and Monsieur and Madame 

Vemeuil abroad. Adeline arranged her affairs become almost too interesting, 

so as to render her residence in France un- "Ah, my dear master I" cried he, "wd- 

necessary ; and having bade an affectionate come home again. Here is the village, God 

adieu to the Count and Countess D , and bless it 1 It is worth a million such places as 

to M. Amand, who had recovered a tolerable Paris. Thank St. Jacques, we are all safe 

degree of cheerfulness, she departed with her back again ! " 

friends for Savoy. The effusion of honest Peter's joy was re- 
They travelled leisurely, and frequently ceived and answered with the kindness it de- 
turned out of their way to view whatever was served. As they drew near the lake music 
worthy of observation. After a long and sounded over the water, and they presently 
pleasant journey, they came once more within saw a large party of the villagers assembled 
view of the Swiss mountains, the sight of on a green spot that sloped to the very 



which revived a thousand interesting recollec- 
tions in the mind of Adeline. She remem- 
bered the circumstances and the sensations 
under which she had first seen them — when 
an orphan, flying from persecution to seek 



margm of the waves, and dancing in all 
their holiday finery. It was the evening of a 
festival. The elder peasants sat under the 
shade of the trees that crowned this little 
eminence, eating milk and fruit, and watch- 



shelter among strangers, and lost to the only ing their sons and daughters frisk it away to 

person on earth whom she loved ; she re- the sprightly notes of the tabor and pipe, 

membered this, and the contrast of the which was joined by the softer tones of a 

present moment struck with all its force upon mandolin. 

her heart. The scene was highly interestmg, and what 

The countenance of Clara brightened into added to its picturesque beauty was a group 

smiles of the most animated delight as she of cattle that stood, some on the brink, some 

drew near the beloved scenes of her infant liaH vn \ive '^aXet, ^hCl o'Cqsc^ on the green 



THE ROMANCE OF THE FOREST. 



tjt 



bank, while several peasant girls, dressed in 
the neat simplici^ of their country, were dis- 
pensing the milkj feast. Peter now rode on 
first, and a crowd soon collected round him, 
who, learning that their beloved master was 
at hand, went forth to meet and welcome 
him. Their warm and honest expressions of 
joy diffused an exquisite satisfaction over the 
heart of the good La Luc, who met them 
with the kindness of a father, and who could 
scarcely forbear shedding tears to this testi- 
mony of attachment. When the younger 
part of the peasants heard of his arrival, the 
general joy was such, that, led by the tabor 
and pipe, they danced before his carriage to 
the chiteau, where they again welcomed him 
and his family with the enlivening strains of 
music. At the gate of the ch&teau they were 
received by Madame La Luc, and a happier 
party never met. 

As the evening was uncommonly mild and 
beautiful, supper was spread in the garden. 
When the repast was over, Clara, whose 
heart was all glee, proposed a dance by 
moonlight. " It will be delicious," said she ; 
** the moonbeams arc already dancing on the 
waters. See what a stream of radiance they 
throw across ^Jie lake, and how they sparkle 
round that little promontory on the left. 
The freshness of the hour, too, invites to 
dancing." 

They all agreed to the proposal. 

"And let the good people who have so 
heartily welcomed us home be called in too," 
said La Luc ; " they shall all partake our 
happiness. There is devotion in making 
others happy, and gratitude ought to make us 
devout. Peter, bring more wine, and set 
some tables under the trees." 

Peter flew, and, while chairs and tables 
were placing, Clara ran for her favourite lute, 
the lute which had formerly afforded her such 
delight, and which Adeline had often touched 
with a melancholy expression. Clara's light 
hand now ran over the chords, and drew 
forth tones of tender sweetness, her voice 
accompanying the following 

AIR. 

Now, at moonlight's fairy hour. 
When faintly gleams each dewy steep, 

And vale and mountain, lake and bow'r, 
In solitary gfrandeur sleep ; 

When slowly sinks the evening breeze, 
That lulls the mind in pensive care. 

And fancy loftier visions sees,^ 
Bid music wake the silent air. 

Bid the merry, merry tabor sound, 
And with the fays of lawn or glade. 

In tripping circlet beat the ground, 
Under the high trees' trembling shade. 

Now, at moonligii'-.t's fairy hour, 
Shall Music breethe her dulcet voice, 

And o'er the waves, with magic pow'r, 
Call on Echo to rejoice. 



Peter, who could not move in a sober 
step, had already spread refreshments under 
the trees, and in a short time the lawn was 
encircled with peasantry. The rural pipe 
and tabor were placed, at Clara's request, 
under the shade of her beloved acacias on 
the margin of the lake ; the merry notes of 
music sounded, Adeline led off tne dance, 
and the mountains answered only to tte 
strains of mirth and melody. 

The venerable La Luc sat among the elder 
peasants, and as he surveyed the scene — ^^his 
children and people thus assembled roiind 
him in one grand compact of harmony and 
joy — the frequent tear bedewed his cheek, and 
he seemed to taste the fulness of an exalted 
delight. 

So much was every heart roused to glad- 
ness that the morning dawn began to peep 
upon the scene of their festivity, when every 
cottager returned to his home, blessing the 
benevolence of La Luc. 

After passing some weeks with La Luc, M. 
Vemeuil bought a ch&teau in the village of 
Lelencourt, and as it was the only one not 
already occupied, Theodore ]iR}kea out for a 
residence in the neighbourhood. At the dis- 
tance of a few leagues, on the beautiful banks 
of the lake of Geneva, where the waters retire 
into a small bay, he purchased a villa. The 
chdteau was characterised by an air of sim- 
plicity and taste, rather than of magnificence, 
which was the chief trait in the surrounding 
scene. The ch&teau was almost encircled 
with woods, which, forming a grand amphi- 
theatre, swept down to the water's edge, and 
abounded with wild and romantic walks. 
Here nature was suffered to sport in all her 
beautiful luxuriance, except where here and 
there the hand of art formed the foliage to 
admit a view of the blue waters of the lake, 
with the white sail that glided by or of the 
distant mountains. 

In front of the chateau the woods opened 
to a lawn, and the eye was suffered to wander 
over the lake, whose bosom presented an 
ever-moving picture, while its varied margin, 
sprinkled with villas, woods, and towns, and 
crowned beyond with the snowy and subhme 
Alps, rising point behind point in awful con- 
fusion, exhibited a scenery of almost un- 
equalled magnificence. 

Here, contemning the splendour of false 
happiness, and possessing the pure and 
rational delights of a love, refined into the 
most tender friendship, surrounded by the 
friends so dear to them, and visited by a select 
and enlightened society — here, in the very 
bosom of felicity, lived Theodore and Adeline 
La Luc. 

The passion of Louis de la Motte yielded 
at length to the powers of absence and neces- 
sity. He still loved Adeline, but it was with 
the placid tenderness of friendship, and when, 
at the eaniest. VQN\\a.V\a^ q\ 'WNRa^'si^^^ V'*. 



152 THE ROMANCE OF THE POREST. 

visited the villa, he beheld their happiness they continued to deserve — ^for not to them- 

with a satisfaction unalloyed by any emotion selves was their happiness contracted, but 

of envy. He afterwards married a lady of diffused to all ^ho came v^thin the sphere of 

some fortune at Geneva, and resigning his their influence. The indigent and unhappy 

^commission in the French service, settled on rejoiced in their benevolence, the virtuous and 

the borders of the lake, and increased the enlightened in their friendship, and their 

social delights of Theodore and Adeline. children in parents whose example impressed 

Their former lives afforded an example of upon their hearts the precepts ofifered to their 

.trials well endured — and their present, of understandings, 
virtues greatly rewarded ; and tiiis reward 



CHARLES DICKENS AND EVAKR, CR\ST\V. PALACE PRBS& 



THE 



MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO 



A ROMANCE 



BV 



ANN RADCLIFFE 

AUTUOH OF "the ROMANCE OF THE FOREST" AND "THE ITALIAN*' 



/nOV 1877 . 



LONDON AND NEW YORK 

GEORGE ROUTLEDGE AND SONS 

1877 



CAPTAIN MARRYAT'S HOVELS. 

Ill fjiicy covers, usifirm with this Volume. 
Peter Simple. 
The King's Own. 
The Poacher. 
The Phantom Ship. 
Mr. Midshipman Easy. 
Monsieur Violet. 
Jacob Faithfcl. 



Frank Mildmay. 

Rattlin the Reefer. 

Percival Keene, 

The Dog Fiend. 

The Pacha of Many Tales, 

Olla Podrida. 



MEMOIRS OF MRS. ANN RADCLIFFR 



J »« 



In nothi|fg, perhaps, is the contrast between the present and preceding ages 
more striking, than in the character of British females, who, in our times, 
have burst those boundaries which the "lords of the creation" had fixed, and 
boldly contested with them in the fields of Literature. It is true that, in all 
ages, there have been ladies whose talents raised them to a proud distinction; 
but their appearance has been like "angels' visits, few and far between." It 
has, however, been reserved to the present age for woman to maintain her 
just rank in the creation ; to exchange the distaff for the pen ; and to wield 
the latter with as much force, and as much elegance, as had ever been done 
by the other sex. 

It has often been the custom to arraign London as deficient in producing 
persons of genius ; and yet, considering that it is so much a commercial city, 
it has been prolific in the. production of persons of talent. — Among the 
" worthies," as Fuller would call them, that London has produced, we have 
to enrol the name of Mrs. Ann RadclifFe, whose maiden name was Ward, 
and who was born in the metropolis on the 9th of July, 1764. She was 
collaterally descended from Chesselden, the celebrated surgeon and anatomist. 
Her parents gave her a good, though not a classical, education ; and early in 
life she discovered much taste for literature, and for contemplating the beauties 
of nature. At the age of twenty-three, she was married to William Radclifife, 
Esq., a graduate at Oxford, who was intended for the bar, and kept several 
terms at one of the inns of court, but was never called. He afterwards became 
Editor and Proprietor of a Newspaper. 

It was not until after her marriage, that Mrs. Radclifife astonished the 
world with those productions which have since been much admired, and 
translated into almost every European language. Her first production was 
" The Castles of Athlin and Dunblane," which was soon followed by " The 
Sicilian Romance," and the " Romance of the Forest." In 1795, she pub- 
lished "A Journey made in the summer of 1793, through Holland, and the 
Western Frontier of Germany ;" to which she added, " Observations made 
during a Tour to the Lakes of Westmoreland and Cumberland." It was 
not, however, in the description of matters of fact that Mrs. Radclifife 
excelled ; it was in wielding the magic wand, and creating regions of her 



MEMOIRS OF MRS. ANN RADCUFFE. 

own, where she might rove " a chartered libertine," that her great talents 
were displayed. Her next work was, of all her writings, the most popular, 
"The Mysteries of Udolpho," which was followed by her last work, '1 The 
Italians." 

In all the Romances of Mrs. Radcliffe, there was a great deal of originality ; 
and she might be said to have founded a new school of fiction. She disdained 
the ordinary tract of Novelists, and shook the soul by the awe of superstition, 
and the terrors of guilt. She was, as the elegant author of the " Pursuits of 
Literature " described her, " a mighty magician, bred and nourished by the 
Florentine muses, in their sacred, solitary caverns, amid the paler shrines of 
Gothic superstition, and in all the dreariness of enchantment," The characters 
in Mrs. Radcliflfe's Romances are as original and well-drawn, as the incidents 
are striking and impressive ; and few writers ever succeeded so well in sus- 
taining the interest of a long tale, as this powerful writer. Her works are 
also interspersed with several pieces of poetry, which are elegant and fanciful, 
displaying the riches of a well-cultivated mind. 

The popularity of Mrs. Radcliffe's works obtained such prices as had never 
before been paid for works of fiction. For the " Mysteries of Udolpho " she 
received ;^5oo, and for the " Italians " ;£8oo ; nor were her Publishers the 
losers, for the sale was such as not only to cover all the expenses, but to 
repay them well for their liberality. 

During the last twelve years of her life, Mrs. Radcliflfe su£fered under bad 
health, having been afflicted with a spasmodic asthma. In the autumn of 

1 822, she visited Ramsgate, which afforded her a temporary relief, but she 
relapsed at the beginning of the ensuing year. On the 9th of January she 
was taken very ill, and lingered until the morning of the 7th of February, 

1823, when she tranquilly expired ; and was interred in a vault of the Chapel 
of Ease at Bayswater. 

Mrs. Radcliffe, though a giant in intellect, was low ii) stature, and of a 
slender form, but exquisitely proportioned : her countenance was beautiful 
and expressive. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



CHAPTER I. 

* * * ■ Home is the resort 

Of love, of joy, of peace and plenty where, 
Supporting and supported, polish'd friends 
And dear relations mingle into bliss. 

Thomson. 

On the pleasant banks of the Garonne, in the 
province of Gascony, stood, in the year 1584, 
the chateau of Monsieur St. Aubert. From 
its windows were seen the pastoral landscapes 
of Guienne and Gascony stretching along the 
river, gay with luxuriant woods and vine, and 
plantations of olives. To the south, the view 
was bounded by the majestic Pyrenees, whose 
siunmits veiled in clouds, or eidiibiting awful 
forms, seen, and lost again, as the partilal 
vapours rolled along, were sometimes barren, 
and gleamed through the blue tinge of air, 
and sometimes frowned with forests of gloomy 
pine, that swept downward to their base. 
These tremendous precipices were contrasted 
by the soft green of the pastures and woods 
that hung upon their skirts ; among whose 
flocks and herds and simple cottages, the eye, 
after having scaled the cliffs above, delighted 
to repose. To the north, and to the east, the 
plains of Guienne and Languedoc were lost 
in the mist of distance : on the west, Gascony 
was bounded by the waters of Biscay. 

M. St. Aubert loved to wander, with his 
wife and daughter, on the margin of the 
Garonne, and to listen to the music that 
floated on its waves. He had known life in 
other forms than those of pastoral simplicity, 
having mingled in the gay and in the busy 
scenes of the world ; but the flattering portrait 
of mankind which his heart had delineated in 
early youth, his experience had too sorrow- 
fully corrected. Yet, amidst the changing 
visions of life, his principles remained un- 
shaken, his benevolence unchilled ; and he 
retired from the multitude, more in pity than 
in anger, to scenes of simple nature, to the 
pure delights of literature, and to the exercise 
of domestic virtues. 

He was a descendant from the younger 
branch of an illustrious family, and it was 
designed that the deficiency of his patrimonial 



wealth should be supplied either by a splendid 
alliance in marriage, or by success in the in- 
trigues of public affairs. But St. Aubert had 
too nice a sense of honour to fulfil the latter 
hope, and too small a portion of ambition to 
sacrifice what he called happiness, to the 
attainment of wealth. After the death of his 
father he married a very amiable woman, his 
equal in birth, and not his superior in fortune. 
The late Monsieur St. Aubert's liberality, or 
extravagance, had so much involved his affairs, 
that his son found it necessary to dispose of a 
part of the family domain ; and* some years 
after his marriage he sold it to Monsieur 
Quesnel, the brother of his wife, and retired 
to a small estate in Gascony, where conjug^ 
fielicity and parental duties divided his atten- 
tion with the treasures of knowledge and the 
illuminations of genius. 

To this spot he had been attached from his 
infancy. He had often made excursions to it 
when a boy ; and the impression of delight 
given to bis mind by the homely kindness of 
the gray-headed peasant to whom it was in- 
trusted, and whose fruit and cream never 
failed, had not been obliterated by sueceeding 
circumstances. The green pastures, along 
which he had so often bounded in the exulta- 
tion of health and youthful freedom — the 
woods, under whose refreshing shade hfe had 
first indulged that pensive melancholy which 
afterwards made a strong feature of his cha- 
racter — the wild walks of the mountains, the 
river, on whose waves he had floated, and the 
distant plains, which seemed boundless as his 
early hopes — v^re never after remembered by 
St. Aubert but with enthusiasm and regret. 
At length he disengaged himself from the 
world, and retired hither, to realise the Mdshes 
of many years. 

The building, as it then stood, was merely 
a summer cottage, rendered interesting to a 
stranger by its neat simphcity, or the beauty 
of the surrounding scene ; and considerable 
additions were necessary to make it a com- 
fortable family residence. St. Aubert felt a 
kind of affection for every part of the fabric, 
which he renx^mbei^m^'^^sw&Vv'w^^^^:^^*^ 



6 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPIIO, 

not suffer a stone of it to be removed ; so that was led between groves of almond, palm-trees, 
the new building, adapted to the style of the flowering-ash, and myrtle, to the distant land- 
old one, formed with it only a simple and scape, where the Garonne wandered, 
elegant residence. The taste of Madame St. The peasants of this gay climate were often 
Aubert was conspicuous in its internal finish- seen on an evening, when the day's labotu: 
ing, where the same chaste simplicity was was done, dancing in groups on the margin 
observable in the furniture, and in the few of the river. Their sprightly melodies, debon^ 
ornaments of the apartments that character- naire steps, the fanciful figure of their dances, 
ized the manners of its inhabitants. with the tasteful and capricious manner in 
The library occupied the west side of the which the girls adjusted their simple dress, 
chateau, and was enriched by a collection of gave a character to the scene entirely French, 
the best books in the ancient and modem The front of the chateau, which, having a 
languages. This room opened upon a grove southern aspect, opened Upon the grandeur of 
which stood on the brow of a gentle declivity, the mountains, was occupied on the ground- 
that fell towards the river, and the tall trees floor by a rustic hall and two excellent sitting- 
gave it a melancholy and pleasing shade ; rooms. The first floor, for the cottage had 
while from the windows the eye caught, no second story, was laid out in bed-chambers, 
beneath the spreading branches, the gay and except one apartment that opened to a balcony, 
luxuriant landscape stretching to the west, and which was generally used for a breakfast- 
and overlooked on the left by the bold pre- room. 

dpices of the Pyrenees. Adjoining the library In the surrounding ground St. Aubert had 
was a green-house stored with scarce and made very tasteful improvements; yet such 
beautiful plants ; for one of the amusements was his attachment to objects he had remem- 
of St. Aubert was the study of botany : and bered from his boyish days, that he had in 
among the neighbouring mountains, which some instances sacrificed taste to sentiment 
afforded a luxurious feast to the mind of the There were two old larches that shaded the 
naturalist, he often passed the day in the building, and interrupted the prospect : St. 
pursuits of his favourite science. He was Aubert had sometimes dedared that he be- 
sometimes accompanied in these little excur- lieved he should have been weak enough to 
sionsjby Madame St. Aubert, and frequently have wept at their fall. In addition to these 
by his daughter ; when, with a small osier larches he planted a little grove of beech, 
Iwsket to receive plants, and another filled pine, and mountain-ash. On a lofty terrace, 
with cold refreshments, such as the cabin of formed by the swelling bank of the river, rose 
the shepherd did not afford, they wandered a plantation of orange, lemon, and palm-trees, 
away among the most romantic and magni- whose fruit in the coolness of evening breathed 
ficent scenes, nor suffiered the charms of delicious fragrance. With these were mingled 
Nature's lowly children to abstract them from a few trees of other species. Here, under the 
the observance of her stupendous works, ample shade of a plane-tree, that spread its 
When weary of sauntering among cliffs that majestic canopy towards the river, St Aubert 
seemed scarcely accessible but to the steps of loved to sit in the fine evenings of stunmer, 
the enthusiast, and where no track appeared with his wife and children, watching beneath 
on the vegetation, but what the foot of the its foliage, the setting-sun, the mild splendour 
lizard had left, they would seek one of those of its light fading from the distant landsrape, 
green recesses which so beautifully adorn the till the shadows of twilight melted its various 
bosom of these mountains ; where, under the features into one tint of sober gray. Here, 
shade of the lofty larch or cedar, they enjoyed too, he loved to read, and converse with Ma- 
their simple repast, made sweeter by the dame St. Aubert ; or to play with his children, 
waters of the cool stream that crept along the resigning himself to the influence of those sweet 
turf, and by the breath of wild flowers and affections which are ever attendsmt on simpli- 
aromatic plants that fringed the rocks and city and nature. He has often said, while 
inlaid the grass. tears of pleasure trembled in his eyes, that 
Adjoining the eastern side of the green- these were moments infinitely more delightful 
house, looking towards the plains of Langue- than any passed amid the brilliant and tumul- 
doc, was a room which Emily called hers, tuous scenes that arc courted by the world, 
and which contained her books, her drawings. His heart was occupied ; it had, what can be 
her musical instruments, with some favourite so rarely said, no wish for a happiness beyond 
birds and plants. Here she usually exercised what it experienced. The consciousness of 
herself in elegant arts, cultivated only because acting right diffused a serenity over his man- 
they were congenial to her taste, and in which ners, which nothing else could impart to a man 
native genius, assisted by the instructions of of moral perceptions hke his, and which re- 
Monsieur and Madame St. Aubert, made her fined his sense of every surrounding^ blessing, 
an early proficient. The windows of this The deepest shade of twilight did not send 
room were particularly pleasant ; they de- him from his favourite plane-tree. He loved 
scended to the floor, and, opening upon the the soothing hour, when the last tints of li^^ht 
/jttle lawn that surrounded the house, the eye d\e awa^y •, "wV^tiv V\\^ ?,\axs» one by one, tremble 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPtiO. ^ 

through ether, and are reflected on the dark St. Aubert cultivated her understanding with 
mirror of the waters ; that hour, which, of all the most scrupulous care. He gave her a 
others, inspires the mind with pensive tender- general view of the sciences, and an exact 
ness, and often elevates it to sublime contem- acquaintance with every part of elegant lite- 
plation. When the moon shed her soft rays rature. He taught her Latin and English, 
among the foliage, he still lingered, and his chiefly that she might understand the subli-^ 
pastoral supper of cream and fruits was often mity of their best poets. She discovered in 
spread beneath it. Then, on the stillness of her early years a taste for works of gepius ; 
night, came the song of the nightingale and it was St. Aubert's principle, as well as 
breathing sweetness, and awakening melan- his inclination, to promote every innocent 
choly. means of happiness. A well-informed mind. 

The first interruptions to the happiness he he would say, is the best security against the 
had known since his retirement, were occa- contagion of folly and of vice. The vacant 
sioned, by the death of his two sons. He lost mind is ever on the watch for relief, and ready 
them at that age when infantine simplicity is to plunge into error to escape from the languor 
so fascinat ing ; arid though, m consideration of idleness. Store it with ideas, teach it the 
of Madame St. Aubert's distress, he resy-ained pleasure of thinking ; and the temptations of 
the expression of his own, and endeavoured to the world without will be counteracted by the 
bear it, as he meant, with philosophy, he had, gratifications derived from the world within, 
in truth, no philosophy that could render him Thought and cultivation are necessary equally 
calm to such losses. One daughter was now to the happiness of a country and a city life ; 
his only surviving child ; and while he watched in the first they prevent the uneasy sensations 
the unfolding of her infant character with of indolence, and afford a subUme pleasure in 
anxjous fondness, he endeavoured with un- the taste they create for the beautiful and 
remitting effort, to counteract those traits in the grand ; in the latter they make dissipation 
her disposition which might hereafter lead her less an object of necessity, and conseq^uently 
from happiness. She had discovered in her of interest. 

early years uncommon delicacy of mind, warm It was one of Emily's earliest pleasures to 
affections, and ready benevolence ; but with ramble among the scenes of nature ; nor was 
these was observable a degree of susceptibility it in the soft and glowing landscape that she 
too exquisite to admit of lasting peace. As most delighted ; she loved more the wild 
she advanced in youth, this sensibility gave a wood walks that sku'ted the mountain ; and 
pensive tone to her spirits, and a softness to still more the mountain's stupendous recesses, 
her manner, which added grace to beauty, and where the silence and grandeur of solitude 
rendered her a very interesting object to per- impressed a sacred awe upon her heart, and 
sons of a congenial disposition. But St. Au- lifted her thoughts to the God op heaven 
bert had too much good sense to prefer a and earth. In scenes like these she would 
charm to a virtue ; and had penetration enough often linger alone, wrapt in a melancholy 
to see that this charm was too dangerous to charm, till the last gleam of day faded from 
its possessor to be allowed the character of the west ; till ttte lonely sound of a sheep-bell, 
a blessing. He endeavoured, therefore, to or the distant bark of a watch-dog, were all 
strengthen her mind ; to inure her to habits that broke the stillness of the evening. . Then, 
of self-command ; to teach her to reject the the gloom of the woods ; the trembling of 
first impulse of her feelings, and to look with their leaves, at intervals, in the breeze ; the 
cool examination upon the disappointments bat, flitting on the twilight ; the cottage- 
he sometimes threw in hep way. While he lights, now seen and now lost — were circum- 
instructed her to resist first impressions, and stances that awakened her mind into effort, 
to acquire that steady dignity of mind that can and led to enthusiasm and poetry, 
alone counterbalance the passions, and bear Her favourite walk was to a httle fishing- 
us, as far as is compatible with our nature, house belonging to St. Aubert, in a woody 
above the reach of circumstances, he taught glen, on the margin of a rivulet that descended 
himself a lesson of fortitude ; for he was often from the Pyrenees, and, after foaming among 
obliged to witness, with seeming indifference, their rocks, wound its silent way beneath the 
the tears and struggles which his caution occa- shades it reflected. Above the woods that 
sionad her. screened this glen rose the lofty summits of 

In person, Emily resembled her mother ; the Pyrenees, which often burst boldly on the 
having the same elegant symmetry of form, eye through the glades below. Sometimes the 
the same ddicacy of features, and the same shattered face ofa rock only was seen, crowned 
hhie eyes full of tender sweetness. But lovely With wild shrubs ; or a shepherd's cabin seated 
as was her person, it was the varied expression on a cliff, overshadowed by dark cypres or 
of her countenance, as conversation awakened waving ash. Emerging from the deep recesses 
the nicer emotions of her mind, that threw such df the woods, the glade opened to the distant 
a captivating grace around her : landscape, where the rich -pastures and vine- 

Thosc tenderer tints, that shun the careless eye, covered slopes of Gascoxitj ^5C^5i»a5L^ evRsSSs^^ 
And in tke world's contagious circle die. tO the p\a.\tVS \ ^jaii ^QoKCfe^ ^Jtt. ^^ ^«vaaaiss5|» 



8 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



chores of tlio Gnrotinc, proves, and hamlets, 
jinrl villas — their outlines softened by distance 
— melted from the e\e into one rich hannonious 
lint. 

This, too, was the favourite retreat of St 
.Vubcrt, to which he frequently withdrew from 
ilie fer\'Our of noon, with his wife, his daughter, 
aad his books ; or came at the sweet evening 
hour to welcome the silent dusk, or to listen 
for the music of the nightingale. Sometimes, 
too, he brought music of his own, and 
awakened every fair echo with the tender 
accents of his oboe ; and often have the tones 
of Emily's voice drawn sweetness from the 
waves over which they trembled. 

It was in one of her excursions to this spot 
that she observed the following lines written 
with a pencil on a part of the wainscot : 

SONNET. 

Go, pendl ! faithful to thy master's sighs I 
Go —tell the Goddess of this fairy scene. 
When next her light steps wind these wood-walks 
green. 

Whence all his tears, his tender sorrows rise ; 

Ah ! paint her form, her soul-illumined eyes, 
ITie sweet expression of her pensive face. 
The light'ning smile, the animated grace — 

The portrait well the lover's voice supplies ; 

Speaks all his heart must feel, his tongue would say : 
Yet, ah ! not all his heart must sadly feel ! 
How oft the floweret's silken leaves conceal 

llie drug that steals the vital spark away ! 

And who that gazes on that angel-smile. 
Would fear its charm, or think it could beguile ! 

These lines were not inscribed to any per- 
son; limily therefore could not apply them 
to herself, though she was imdoubtedly the 
nymph of these shades. Having glanced 
round the little circle of her acquaintance 
without being detained by a suspicion as to 
whom they could be addressed, she was com- 
pelled to rest in uncertainty ; an uncertainty 
which would have been more painful to an 
idle mind than it was to hers. She had no 
leisure to suffer this circumstance, trifling at 
first, to swell into importance by frequent 
remembrance : the little vanity it had excited 
(for the incertitude which forbade her to pre- 
sume upon having inspired the sonnet, forbade 
her also to disbelieve it), passed away, and 
the incident was dismissed from her thoughts 
amid her books, her studies, and the exercise 
of social charities. 

Soon after this period, her anxiety was 
awakened by the indisposition of her father, 
who was attacked with a fever ; which, though 
not thought to be of a dangerous kind, gave 
a severe shock to his constitution, Madame 
St. Aubert and Emily attended him with unre- 
mitting care ; but his recovery was very slow, 
and, as he advanced towards health, Madame 
seemed to decline. 
The first scene he visited, after he ^^•as well 
enoiiffli to take the air, was his favourite fibli- 



ing-house. A basket of provisions was sent 
thither, with books, and Emily's lute ; for 
fishing-tackle he had no use, for he never 
could fiad amusement in torturing or destroy- 
ing. 

After employing himself for about an hour 
in botanising, dinner was served. It was a 
repast, to which gratitude for being agnin 
permitted to visit this spot gave sweetness ; 
and family happiness once more smiled be- 
neath these sb^es. Monsieur St. Aubert 
conversed with imusual cheerfulness ; every 
object delighted his senses. ,The refreshing 
pleasure from the first view of natiu^, after 
the pain of illness and the confinement of a 
sick chamber, is above the conceptions, as 
well as the descriptions, of those in health. 
The green woods and pastures ; the flowery 
tiuf ; the balmy air ; the murmm- of the 
limpid stream ; and even the hum of every 
little insect of the shade, -seemed to revivify 
the soul, and make mere existence bliss. 

Madame St Aubert, reanimated by the 
cheerfulness and the recovery of her husband, 
was no longer sensible of the indisposition 
which had lately oppressed her ; and, as she 
sauntered along the wood-walks of this 
romantic glen, and conversed with him and 
with her daughter, she often looked at them 
alternately with a degree of tenderness that 
filled her eyes with tears. St. Aubert observed 
this more than once, and gently reproved her 
for the emotion ; but she could only smile, 
clasp his hand and that of Emily, and weep 
the more. He felt the tender enthusiasm 
stealing upon himself in a degree that became 
almost painful ; his featiu-es assumed a serious 
air, and he could not forbear secretly sighing 
• Perhaps I shall some time look back to 
these moments, as to the summit of my hap- 
piness, with hopeless regret. But let me not 
misuse them by useless anticipation ; let me 
hope I shall not lire to mourn the loss of 
those who are dearer to me than life.' 

To relieve, or perhaps to indulge, the 
pensive temper of his mind, he bade Emily 
fetch the lute she knew how to touch with 
such sv\eet pathos. As she drew near the 
fishing-house, she was surprised to hear the 
tones of the instrument, which were awakened 
by the hand of taste, and uttered a plaintive 
air, whose exquisite melody engaged all her 
attention. She listened in profound silence, 
afraid to move from the spot, lest the sound 
of her steps should occasion her to lose a note 
of the music, or should disturb the musician. 
Everything without the building was still, and 
no person appeared. She continued to listen, 
till timidity succeeded to surprise and delight ; 
a timidity increased by a remembrance of the 
pencilled lines she had formerly seen, and she 
hesitated whether to proceed or to return. 

While she paused, the music ceased ; and 
after a momentary hesitation she re-coUected 
courage Xoa-dvance to the fishing-house, which 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 9 

she entered with faltering steps, and found formed her. From the purport of these lines 

unoccupied ! Her lute lay on the table ; it was not unreasonable to believe that the 

everything seemed undisturbed, and she be- poet, the musician, and the thief, were the 

gan to believe it was another instrument she same person. But though the music she had 

had heard, till she remembered that when she heard, the written lines she had seen, and the 

followed M. and Madame St. Aubert from disappearance of the picture, formed a com- 

this spot her lute was left on the window-seat, bination of cirounstances very remarkable, 

She felt alarmed, she knew not wherefore; she was irresistibly restrained from mentioning 

the melancholy gloom of evening, and the them ; secretly determining, however, never 

profound stillness of the place, interrupted only again to visit the fishing-house without Mon- 

by the light trembling of leaves, heightened sieur or Madame St. Aubert. 
her fanciful apprehensions, and she was They returned pensively to the chateau. 

desirous of quitting the building, but per- Emily musing on the incident which had just 

ceived herself grow faint, and sat down. As occurred ; St. Aubert reflecting with placid 

she tried to recover herself, the pencilled lines gratitude on the blessings he possessed ; and 

on the wainscot met her eye ; she started as Madame St Aubert somewhat disturbed and 

if she had seen a stranger ; but endeavouring perplexed by the loss of her daughter's pic- 

to conquer the treraour of her spirits, rose ture. As they drew n^u" the house they ob- 

and went to the window. To the lines before served an unusual bustle about it ; the soimd 

noticed she now perceived that others were of voices was distinctly heard ; servants and 

added, in which her name appeared. horses were seen passing between the trees ; 

Though no longer suftered to doubt that and at length the wheels of a carriage rolled 

they were addressed to herself, she was as along. Having come within view of the 

ignorant as before by whom they could be front of the chateau, a landau with smokuoig 

written. While she mused, she thought she horses appeared on the little lawn before it. 

heard the sound of a step without the build- St. Aubert perceived the liveries of his brother- 

ing ; and again alarmed, she caught up her in-law, and in the parlour he found Monsieur 

lute and hurried away. Monsieur and Madame and Madame Quesnel already entered. They 

St. Aubert she found in a little path that had left Paris some days before, and were on 

wound along the sides of the glen. the way to their estate, only ten leagues distant 

Having reached a green summit, shadowed from La Valine, and which Monsieur Quesnel 
by palm-trees and overlooking the valleys and had purchased several years before of St. 
plains of Gascony, they seated themselves on Aubert. This gentleman was the only brother of 
the turf ; and while their eyes wandered over Madame St. Aubert ; but the ties of relation- 
the glorious scene, and they inhaled the sweet ship having never been strengthened by con- 
breath of flowers and herbs that enriched the geniality of character, the intercourse between 
grass, Emily playe^ and surig several of their them had not been frequent. M. Quesnel 
fevourite airs, with the delicacy of expression had lived altogether in the world : his aim 
in which she so much excelled. had been consequence ; splendour was the ob- 

Music and conversation detained them in ject of his taste ; and his address and know- 
this enchanting spot till the sun's last light ledge of character had carried him forward 
slept upon the plains ; till the white sails that to the attainment of almost all that he had 
glided beneath the mountains, where the courted. By a man oif such a disposition, it 
Garonne wandered, became dim, and the is not surprising that the virtues of St. Aubert 
gloom of evening stole over the landscape, should be overlooked ; or that his pure taste, 
It was a melancholy but not unpleasing gloom, simplicity, and moderated wishes, were con- 
st. Aubert and his family rose, and left the sidered as marks of a weak intellect and of 
place with regret : alas! Madame St. Aubert confined views. The marriage of his sister 
knew npt that she left it for ever. with St. Aubert had been mortifying to his 

When they reached the fishing-house she ambition; for he had designed that the matri- 

missed her bracelet, and recollected that she monial connection she formed should assist 

had taken it from her arm after dinner, and him to attain the consequence which he so 

liad left it on the table when she went to much desired ; and some offers were made 

walk.. After a long search, in which Emily her by persons whose rank and fortune flattered 

was very active, she was compelled to resign his warmest, hope. But his sister, who was 

herself to the loss of it. What made this then addressed also by St. Aubert, perceived, 

bracelet valuable to her, was a miniature of or thought she perceived, that happmess and 

her daughter to which it was attached, splendour were not the same ; and she did not 

esteemed a striking resemblance, and which hesitate to forego the last for the attainment 

had been painted only a few months before, of the former. Whether Monsieur Quesnel 

When Emily was convinced that the bracelet thought them the same or not, he would readily 

was really gone, she blushed, and became have sacrificed his sister's peace to the grati- 

thoughtful. That some stranger had been in fication of his own ambition ; and, on her 

the fishing-house during her absence, her lute marriage with St. Aubert, ex^reasedY^^^xv*"^^ 

eind the additipnal Unes of a pencil already ia- lus C0U\OTVV^ q1 U^ *V^vC«.'?>^ ^^"^^x^^Vy^^sja- ^^ 



lo THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

the connection which it permitted. Madame M. Quesnel, ' since I purchased your £Eimily 

St. Aubert, though she concealed this insult estate.' 

from her husband, felt, perhaps for the first • Somewhere thereabout,' replied St. Au- 

time, resentment lighted in her heart ; and bert, suppressing a sigh. 

though a regard for her own dignity, united ' It is near five years since I have been 

with considerations of prudence, restrained there,' resumed Quesod; 'for Paris and its 

her expression of this resentment, there was neighbourhood is the only place in the world 

ever after a mild reserve in her manner towards to live in ; and I am so im.mersed in politics, 

M. Quesnel, wliich he both understood and and have so many affiairs of moment on my 

felt hands, that I find it difficult to steal away 

In his own marriage he did not follow his even for a month or twa' St. Aubert re- 
sister's example. His ladywas an Italian, and maining silent, M. Quesnel proceeded: 'I 
an heiress, by birth ; and, by nature and edu- have sometimes wondered how you, who have 
cation, was a vain and frivolous woman. lived in the capital and have been accustomed 

They now determined to pass the night with to company, can exist elsewhere, especially 
St. Aubert ; and as the chateau was not large in so remote a country as this, where you can 
enough to accommodate their servants, the neither hear nor see anything, and can, in 
latter were dismissed to the neighbouring short, be scarcely conscious of life. ' 
village. When the first compliments were over, * I live for my fieimily and myself,' said St. 
and the arrangements for the night made, M. Aubert : ' I am now contented to know only 
Quesnel began the display of his intelligence happiness ; formerly I knew life.* 
and connections ; while St. Aubert, who had ' I mean to expend thirty or forty thousand 
been long enough in retirement to find these livres on improvements,' said M. Quesnel, 
tofMcs recommended by their novelty, listened without seeming to notice the words of St. 
with a degree of patience and attention which Aubert ; ' for I design, nejct summer, to bring 
his guest mistook for the humility of wonder, here my friends, the Duke de Durefort and the 
The latter, indeed, described the few festivities Marquis Ramont, to pass a month or two with 
which the turbulence of that period permitted me. ' To St. Aubert's inquiry, as to these 
to the court of Henry the Third, with a minute- intended improvements, he replied that he 
ness that somewhat recompensed for hisosten- should take down the whole east wing of the 
tation ; but when he came to speak of the chateau, and raise upon the site a set of stables, 
character of the Duke of Joyeuse, of a secret 'Then I shall build,' said he, *a salle d 
treaty which he knew to be negotiating with manger^ a salon^ a sallt au commune^ and a 
the Porte, and of the light in which Henry of number of rooms for servants, for at present 
Navarre was received, M. St. Aubert recollected there is not accommodation for a third part of 
enough of his former experience to be assured my own people.' 

that his guest could be only of an inferior * It accommodated our father's household.' 
class of politicians ; and that, from the im- said St. Aubert, grieved that the old mansion 
portance of the subjects upon which he com- was to be thus improved, ' and that was not 
mitted himself, he could not be of the rank to a small one.' 

which he pretended to belong. The opinions ' Our notions are somewhat enlarged since 
delivered by M. Quesnel were such as St. those days,' said M. Quesnel: 'what was 
Aubert forbore to reply to ; for he knew that then thought a decent style of living would 
his guest had neither humanity to feel, not not now be endured.' Even the calm St. 
discernment to perceive, what is just. Aubert blushed at these words ; but his anger 

Madame Quesnel, meanwhile, was express- soon yielded to contempt. ' The ground 
ing to Madame St. Aubert her astonishment about the chateau is encumbered with trees ; 
that she could bear to pass her life in this I mean to cut some of them down.' 
remote comer of the world, as she called .it, ' Cut down the trees too I* said St. Aubert. 
and describing, from a wish probably of ex- ' Certainly. Why should I not ? they in- 
citing envy, the splendour of the balls, ban- terrupt my prospects. There is a chestnut 
quets, and processions, which had just been which spreads its branches before the whole 
given by the court in honour of the nuptials south side of the chateau, and which is so 
of the Duke de Joyeuse with Margaretta of ancient that they tell me the hollow of its 
Lorrain, the sister of the Queen. She de- trunk will hold a dozen men; your enthusiasm 
scribed with equal minuteness the magni- will scarcely contend that there can be either 
ffccnce she had seen, and that from which use or beauty in such a sapless old tree as this.* 
she had been excluded : while Emily's vivid ' Good God !' exclaimed St. Aubert, ' you 
fancy, as she listened with the ardent curiosity surely will not destroy that noble chestnut, 
of youth, hei.!;htened the scenes she heard of; which has flourished for centuries, the glory 
and Madame St. Aubert, looking on her of the estate 1 It was in its maturity when 
family, felt, as a tear stole to her eye, that the present mansion was built. How often, 
though splendour may grace happiness, virtue in my youth, have I climbed among its broad 
only can bestow it, branches, and sat embowered amidst a world 

'It IS now twelve years, St. Aubert,' sa\d oi leaves, vi\i\\^\>:vft\vt?orj«!fcvower has patteroj 



"JtHE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPMO. 



ti 



above, and not a rain-drop reached me ! How 
often have I sat with my book in my hand, 
sometimes reading, and sometimes looking 
out between the branches upon the wide land- 
scape, and setting sun, till twilight came, 
and brought the birds home to their little 

nests among the leaves ! How often but 

pardon me,' added St. Aubert, recollecting 
that he was speaking to a man who could 
neither comprehend nor allow for his feelings, 
' I am talking of times and feelings as old- 
fashioned as the taste that would spare that 
venerable tree.' 

' It will certainly come down,' said M. 
Quesnel : ' I believe I shall plant some Lom- 
b.irdy poplars amor^g the clumps of chestnut 
that I shall leave of the avenue : Madame 
Quesnel is partial to the poplar, and tells me 
how much it adorns a villa of her uncle not 
far from Venice.' 

' On the banks of the Brenta, indeed 1' con- 
tinued St. Aubert, 'where its spiry form is 
intermingled with the pine and the cypress, 
and where it plays over light and elegant 
porticoes and colonnades, it unquestionably 
adorns the scene ; but among the giants of the 
forest, and near a heavy Gothic mansion * 

' Well, my good sir,' said M. Quesnel, ' I 
will not dispute with you ; you must return 
to Paris before our ideas can at all agree. 
But i propos of Venice, I have some thought 
of going thither next summer ; events may 
call me to take possession of that same villa, 
too, which they tell me is the most charming 
that can be imagined. In that case I shall 
leave the improvements I mention to another 
year ; and I may perhaps be tempted to stay 
some time in Italy.' 

Emily was somewhat surprised to hear him 
tilk of being tempted to remain abroad, 
after he had mentioned his presence to be 
so necessary at Paris, that it was with diffi- 
culty he could steal away for a month or 
two ; but St. Aubert understood the self- 
importance of the man too well to wonder 
at this trait ; and the possibility that these 
projected improvements might be deferred, 
gave him a hope that they might never take 
place. 

Before they separated for the night, M. 
Quesnel desired to speak with St. Aubert 
alone ; and they retired to another room, 
where they remained a considerable time. 
"The subject of this conversation was not 
known : but, whatever it might be, St. Aubert, 
when he returned to the supper-room, seemed 
much disturbed ; and a shade of sorrow 
sometimes fell upon his features that alarmed 
Madame St. Aubert. When they were alone, 
she was tempted to inquire the occasion of 
it ; but the delicacy of mind, which had ever 
appeared in his conduct, ♦•estrained her : she 
considered, that, if St. Aubert wished her to 
be acquainted with the subject of his concern, 
he would not yrait for her inquiries. 



On the following day, before M. Quesnd 
departed, he had a second conference with 
St. Aubert. 

The guests, after dining r.t the chateau, set 
out in the cool of the day for Epourville, 
whither they gave him and Madame St. 
Aubert a pressing invitation, prompted rather 
by the vanity of displaying their splendour, 
than by a wish to make their friends happy. 

Emily returned with delight, to the liberty 
which their presence had restrained — to her 
books, her walks, and the rational conversa- 
tion of M. and Madame St. Aubert, who 
seemed to rejoice no less that they were de- 
livered from the shackles which arrogance 
and frivolity had imposed. 

Madame St. Aubert excused herself from 
sharing their usual evening walk, complaining 
that she was not quite well ; and St. Aubert 
and Emily went out together. 

They chose a walk towards the moimtains, 
intending to visit some old pensioners of 
St. Aubert, whom, from his very moderate 
income, he contrived to support ; though it is 
probable M. Quesnel, with his very lai^e one, 
could not have afforded this. 

After distributing to his pensioners their 
weekly stipends — listening patiently to the 
complaints of some, redressing the grievances 
of others, and softening the discontents of all 
by the look of sympathy and the smile of 
benevolence — St. Aubert returned home 
through the woods, 

where 

At fall of eve, the fairy people throng, 
In various games and revelry to pass 
The summer night as village stones tell. 

Thomson. 

' The evening gloom of woods was always 
delightful to me,' said St. Aubert, whose mind 
now experienced the sweet calm which results 
from the consciousness of having done a 
beneficent action, and which disposes it tq 
receive pleasure from every surrounding ol> 
ject : ' I remember that in my youth this gloom 
used to call forth to my fancy a thousand 
fairy visions and romantic images ; and I own 
I am not yet wholly insensible of that high 
enthusiasm which wftkes the poet's dream : I 
can hnger with solemn steps under the deep 
shades, send forward a transforming eye into 
the distant obsciu"ity, and Usten with thriUing 
delight to the mystic murmuring of the woods.' 

'O my dear father,' said Emily, while a 
sudden tear started to her eye, 'how exactly 
you describe what I have felt so often, and 
which I thought nobody had ever felt but 
myself ! But, hark I here comes the sweep- 
ing sound over the wood-tops — NoW it dies 
away. How solemn the stillness that suc- 
ceeds ! Now the breeze swells again ! It is 
like the voice of some supernatural being 
— the voice of the spirit of the wo<id&^^fca^. 
watches ovei Vhem\yj m^\.. ^i£v\ -^foaxNssgevX. 
is yonder?— ^u\. w. V^ ^croaX— «cA. ^^^ ^^ 



Z3 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



gleams again, near the root of that large 
chestnut : look, sir !' 

• Are you such an admirer of nature, ' said St. 
Aubcrt, • and so little acquainted with her ap- 
pearances, as not to know that for the glow- 
worm ? But come,' added he gaily, ' step a 
little further, and we shall see fairies perhaps ; 
they are often companions. The glow-worm 
lends his light, and they in return charm him 
with music and the dance. Do you see no- 
thing tripping yonder ?' 

Emily laughed. 'Well, my dear sir,' said 
she, • since you allow of this alliance, I may 
venture to own I have anticipated you ; and 
almost dare venture to repeat some verses I 
made one evening in these very woods.' 

• Nay,' repUed St. Aubert, ' dismiss the aU 
mast, and venture quite : let us hear what 
vagaries fancy has been pla)ring in your mind. 
If she has given you one of her spells, you 
need not envy those of the fairies. ' 

• If it is strong enough to enchant your judg- 
mient, sir,' said Emily, 'while I disclose her 
images, I need not envy them. The lines go 
in a sort of tripping measure, which I thought 
might suit the subject well enough ; but I 
fear they are too irregular. ' 

THE GLOW-WORM. 

How pleasant is the green-wood's deep-matted shade 

On a mid-summer's eve, when the fresh rain is 

o'er; 

When the yellow beams slope, and sparkle through 

the glade, 

And swiftly in the thin.air the light swallows soar ! 

But sweeter, sweeter still, when the sun sinks to 
rest. 
And twilight comes on, with the fairies so gay 
Tripping through the forest-walk, where flowers, 
unprest. 
Bow not their tall heads beneath their frolic play. 

To music's softest sounds they dance away the hour. 
Till moon-light steals down among the trembling 
leaves. 
And chequers all the ground, and guides them to 
the bower, 
The long-haunted bower, where the nightingale 
grieves. 

Then no more they dance, till her sad song is done, 
But, silent as the night, to her mourning attend ; 

And often as her dying notes their pity have won. 
They vow all her sacred haunts from mortals to 
defend. 

When down among the mountains sinks the evening 
star. 
And the changing moon forsakes this shadowy 
sphere, 
How cheerless would they be, though they faines 
are. 
If I, with my pale light, came not near ! 

Yet cheerless though they'd be, they're ungrateful 
to my love ! 
For often, when the traveller's benighted on his 

A ^?^' ' 

And I glimmer in his path, and would guide him 

through the grove, 
Tbey bind me in their magic spells to lead him 
Kw astray ; 



And in the mire to leave him, till the stars are all 
burnt out ; 
While in strange-looking shapes they frisk about 
the ground, 
And afar in the woods they raise a dismal shout, 
Till I shrink into my cell again for terror of the 
sound I 

But, see where all the tiny elves come dancing in a 
jf ring, 
M^ith the merry merry pipe, and the tabor, and 
the horn, 
And the timbrel so clear, and the lute with dulcet 
string; 
Then roimd about the oak they go till peeping of 
the morn. 

Down yonder glade two lovers steal, to shun the 
fairy queen. 
Who frowns upon their pli^ted vows, and jealous 
is of me. 
That yester-eve I lighted them, along the dewy 
green. 
To seek the purple Hower whose juice from all her 
spells can free. 

And now to punish me, she ke^s afar her jocund 
band. 
With the merry merry pipe, and the tabor, and 
the lute : 
If I creep near yonder oak she will wave her fairy 
wand, 
And to me the dance will cease, and the music all 
be mute. 

O ! had I but that purple flower whose leaves her 
charms can foil, 
And knew like fays to draw the juice, and throw 
it on the wind, 
I'd be her slave no longer, nor the traveller beguile, 
And help all faithful lovers, nor fear the fairy 
kind! 

But soon the vapour of the 7vobds will wander afar. 
And the fickle moon will fade, and the stars dis- 
appear ; 

Then cheerless will they be, though they fairies are. 
If I, with my pale light, come not nearl 

Whatever St. Aubert might think of the 
stanzas he would not deny his daughter the 
pleasure of believing that he approved them ; 
and having given his commendation he sunk 
into a re\erie, and they walked on in silence. 

.A faint erroneous ra^. 

Glanced from the imperfect surfaces of things 
Flung half an image on the straining eye ; 
While waving woods, and villages, and streams. 
And rocks, and mountain tops, that long retain 
The ascending i^leam, are all one swinuning scene. 
Uncertain if beheld. 

Thomson. 

St. Aubert continued silent till he reached 
the chateau, where his wife had retired to her 
chamber. The languor and dejection that 
had lately oppressed her, and which the exer- 
tion called forth by the arrival of her guests 
had suspended, now returned with increased 
effect. On the following day symptoms of 
fever appeared ; and St. Aubert, having sent 
for medical advice, learned that her disorder 
was a fever of the same nature as that from 
which he had. lately recovered. She had, in- 
deed, \.?c\«;Tv v\it ml^cxion dxffvw^ her atten- 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



x3 



dance upon him ; and her constitution being 
too weak to throw out the disease imme- 
diately, it had lurked in her veins, and 
occasioned the heavy languor of which she 
had complained. St. Aubert, whose anxiety 
for his wife overcame every other considera- 
tion, detained the physician in his house. He 
remembered the feelings and the reflections 
that had called a momentary gloom upon his 
mind, on the day when he had last visited the 
fishing house in company with Madame St 
Aubert, and he now admitted a presentiment 
that this illness would be a fatal one. But he 
effectually concealed this from her and from 
his daughter, whom he endeavoured to re- 
animate with hopes that her constant 
assiduities Would not be unavailing. The 
physician, when asked by St Aubert for his 
opinion of the disorder, replied that the event 
of it depended upon circiunstances which he 
could not ascertain. Madame St. Aubert 
seemed to have formed a more decided one ; 
but her eyes only gave hints of this. She 
frequently fixed them upon her anxious 
friends with an expression of pity and of ten- 
derness, as if she anticipated the sorrow that 
awaited them, and that seemed to say, it was 
for their sakes only, for their sufferings, that 
she regretted life. On the seventh day the 
disorder was at its crisis. The physician 
assumed a graver manner, which she ob- 
served, and took occasion, when her family 
had once quitted the chamber, to tell him 
that she perceived her death was approaching. 
Do not attempt to deceive me, said she ; I 
feel that I cannot long survive : I am pre- 
pared for the event — I have long, I hope, been 
preparing for it. Since I have not long to 
live, do not suffer a mistaken compassion to 
induce you to flatter my family with false 
hopes. If you do, their affliction will only be 
the heavier when it arrives : I will endeavour 
to teach them resignation by my example. 

The physician was afifected : he promised 
to obey her, and told St. Aubert somewhat 
abruptly that there was nothing to expect. 
The latter was not philosopher enough to 
restrain his feelings when he received this in- 
formation ; but a consideration of the in- 
creased affliction which the observance of his 
grief would occasion his wife, enabled him, 
after some time, to command himself in her 
presence. Emily was at first overwhelmed 
with the intelligence ; then, deluded by the 
strength of her wishes, a hope spnmg up in 
her mind that her mother would yet recover, 
and to this she pertinaciously adhered ahnost 
to the last hour. 

The progress of this disorder was marked, 
on the side of Madame St. Aubert, by patient 
suffering and subjected wishes. The com- 
posure with which she awaited her death 
could be derived only from the retrospect of a 
life governed, as far as human frailty permits, 
by a conscioujiiess of being always in the 



presence of the Deity, and by the hope of a 
higher world. But her piety could not 
entirely subdue the grief of parting from those 
whom she so dearly loved. During these her 
last hours she conversed much with St. Aubert 
and Emily on the prospect of futurity, and 
other religious topics. The resignation she 
ij^ressed, with the firm hope of meeting in a 
mture world the friends she left in this, and 
the effort which sometimes appeared to con- 
ceal her sorrow at this temporary separation, 
frequently affected St. Aubert so much as to 
oblige him to leave the room. Having in- 
dulged his tears awhile, he would dry them, 
and return to the chamber with a countenance 
composed by an endeavour which did but 
increase his grief. 

Never had Emily felt the importance of the 
lessons which had taught her to restrain her 
sensibility so much as in these moments, and 
never had she practised them with a triumph 
so complete. But when the last was over she 
sunk at once under the pressure of her sorrow, 
and then perceived that it was hope, as well 
as fortitude, which had hitherto supported 
her. St. Aubert was for a time too devoid of 
comfort himself to bestow any on his daughter. 



CHAPTER IL 

* I could a talc unfold, whose lightest word 
Would harrow up thy soul.' 

SUAKBSPBAKK. • 

Madame St. Aubert was interred in the 
neighbouring village church : her husband and 
daughter attended her to the grave, followed 
by a long train of the peasantry, who were 
sincere mourners of this excellent woman. 

On his return from the funeral, St. Aubert 
shut himself in his chamber. When he came 
forth it was with a serene countenance, though 
pale in sorrow. He gave orders that his 
family should attend him. Emily only was 
absent ; who, overcome with the scene she 
had just witnessed, had retired to her closet 
to v^eep alone. St. Aubert followed her 
thither : he took her hand in silence, while she 
continued to weep ; and it was some moments 
before he could so far command his voice as 
to speak. It trembled while he said, 'My 
Emily, I am going to prayers with my family ; 
you will join us. We must ask support from 
above. Where else ought we to seek it — 
where else can we find it?' 

Emily checked her tears, and followed her 
father to the parlour, where the servants being 
assembled, St. Aubert read, in a low and 
solemn voice, the Evening Service, and added 
a prayer for the soul of the departed. During 
this his voice often faltered, his tears fell upon 
the book, and at length he paused. Evi.^ ^V«. 



n 



THE MYSTERIES OF UIXH^HO. 



cTc-.-rited his views above this world, and fixuilr 
brou:,'!it cor.i'crt to his heart 

When the.=-er\-ice \*-a£ ended, and thesennEUits 
vrere withdrawn, he tenderly kissed Emihr, and 
said : ' I have endeavoured to teach }noa. from 
your earliest youth, the duty of self-command ; 
1 have pointed out to you the great import- 
ance of it through life, not only as it preser\-ei 
us in the various and dangerous temptations 
that call us from rectitude and \irtue, but as 
it b'mits the indulgences which are termed 
virtuous, yet which, extended beyond a cer- 
tain boundary, are vicious, for their conse- 
quence is evil. All excess is vicious; even 
that sorrow which is amiable in its origin, 
becomes a selfish and unjust passion if in- 
dul|^ed at the expense of our duties : by our 
duties I mean what we owe to ourselves as 
well as to others. The indulgence of exces- 
dve grief enervates the mind, and almost in- 
capacitates it for again partaking of those 
variotis innocent enjoyments which a bene- 
volent God designed to be the sunshine of our 
lives. My dear Emily, recollect and practise 
the precepts I have so often given you, and 
which your own experience has so often shown 
you to be wise. 

•Your sorrow is useless. Do not receive 
this as merely a common-place remark, but 
let reason therefore restrain sorrow. I would 
not annihilate your feelings, my child, I would 
only teach you to command them ; for what- 
ever may be the evils resulting from a too sus- 
ceptible heart, nothing can be hoped from an 
insensible one ; that, on the other hand, is all 
vice — vice, of which the deformity is not 
softened, or the effect consoled for, by any 
semblance or possibility of good. You know 
my sufferings, and are therefore convinced that 
mme are not the light words which, on these 
occasions, are so often repeated to destroy 
even the sources of honest emotion, or which 
merely display the selfish ostentation of a false 
philosophy. I will show my Emily that I can 
practise what I advise. I have said thus much 
because I cannot bear to see you wasting in 
useless sorrow for want of that resistance 
which is due from mind ; and I have not said 
it till now, because there is a period when all 
reasoning must yield to nature ; that is past : 
and another, when excessive indulgence having 
sunk into habit, weighs down the elasticity of 
the spirits so as to render conquest nearly im- 
possible ; that is to come. You, my Emily 
will show that you are willing to avoid it. ' 

Emily smiled through her tears upon her 
father : ' Dear sir, ' said she, and her voice trem- 
bled ; she would have added, ' I will show myself 
worthy of being your daughter ;' but a mingled 
emotion of gratitude, affection, and grief over- 
came her. 

St. Aubert suffered her to weep without in- 
terruption, and then began to talk on common 
tomes. 
The jSrst person who came to condole with 



Sl Aobert vbs a. &L Baneanx, an austere and 
seenunglj onfeeiingr man. A taste for botany 
bad introdnced diem to each other, fxx they 
had ftcqnently met in their wanderings among 
the moontainsL M. Baneaux had retired from 
the worid, and almost from society, to li\-e in 
a pleasant diateaa on the skirts of the woods 
near La Val^ He also had beoi disappointed 
in his ofnnian of mankind ; but he did not, 
like St. Anbeit, pity and mourn for them ; he 
fdt more indignation at thdr vices than com- 
passion for their wfSdmesses. 

St Aubert was some^^iat surprised to see 
him ; for though he had often pressed him to 
ccrnie to the chateau, he had never till now 
accepted the invitation: and now he came 
without ceremony or reserve, entering the 
parlour as an old niend. The claims of mis- 
fortune appeared to have softened down all 
the ruggedness and prejudices of his heart 
St Aubert unhappy, seemed to be the sole idea 
that occupied his mind. It was in manners, 
more than in words, that he appeared to sym- 
pathise with his friends ; he spdce little on the 
subject of their grief; but the minute attention 
he gave them, and the modulated voice and 
softened look that accompanied it, came from 
his heart, and spoke to theirs. 

At this melancholy period St Aubert was 
likewise visited by Madame Cheron; his only 
surviving sister, who had been some years a 
widow, and now resided on hsx own estate 
near Thoulouse. The intercourse between 
them had not been very frequent In hsc 
condolements, wcxrds were not wanting ; she 
understood not the magic of the look that 1 
speaks at once to the soul, or the voice that * 
sinks like balm to the heart : but she assured 
St Aubert that she sincerely sympathized 
with him ; praised the virtues of his late wife, 
and then offered what she considered to be 
consolation. Emily wept unceasingly While 
she ,spoke ; St. Aubert was tranquil, ustened 
to what she said in silence, and then turned 
the discourse upon another subject 

At parting, she pressed him and her niece 
to make her an early visit. ' Change of place 
will amuse you,' said she; 'and it is wrong 
to give way to grief.' 

St. Aubert acknowledged the truth of these 
words of course ; but at the same time felt 
more reluctant than ever to quit the spot 
which his past happiness had consecrated. 
The presence of his wife had sanctified every 
surrounding scene ; and each day, as it gra- 
dually softened the acuteness of ms suffering, 
assisted the tender enchantment, that bound 
him to home. 

But there are calls which must be complied 
with, and of this kind was the visit he paid to 
his brother-in-law M. Quesnel. An affair of 
an interesting nature made it necessary that 
he should delay the visit no longer ; and, 
"wisVimg lo rouse Emily from her dejection, he 
took "het yiViJq. Ys^m Xo ^^^svxri'iDft. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



XS 



As the carriageentered upon the forest that 
adjoined his paternal domain, his eyes once 
more caught, between the chesnut avenue", 
the turreted comers of the chateau. He 
sighed to think of what had passed since he 
was last there, and that it was now the pro- 
perty of a man who neither revered nor valued 
it. At length he entered the avenue, whose 
lofty trees had so often delighted him when a 
boy, and whose melancholy shade was now so 
congenial with the tone of his spirits. Every 
feature of the edifice, distinguished by an air 
of heavy grandeur, appeared successively 
between the branches of the trees — the broad 
turret, the arched gateway that led into the 
courts, the drawbridge, and the dry foss^ 
which surrounded the whole. 

The sound of carriage wheels brought a 
troop of servants to the great gate, where St. 
Aubert alighted, and from which he led 
Emily into the Gothic hall, now no longer 
hung with the arms and ancient banners of 
the family. These were displaced, and the 
old wainscoting, and beams that crossed the 
roof, were painted white. The large table, 
too, that used to stretch along the upper end 
of the hall, where the master of the mansion 
loved to display his hospitahty, and whence 
the peal of laughter and the song of convi- 
viality had so often resounded, was now 
removed ; even the benches that had sur- 
rounded the hall were no longer there. The 
heavy walls were hung with frivolous orna- 
ments, and everything that appeared denoted 
the false taste and corrupted sentiments of the 
tlresent owner. 

7 St. Aubert followed a gay Parisian servant 
Ao a parlour, where sat Monsieur and Madame 
Quesnel, who received him with a stately 
politeness, and, after a few formal words of 
condolement, seemed to have forgotten that 
they ever had a sister. 

Emily felt tears swell in her eyes, and then 
resentment checked them. St. Aubert, calm 
and deliberate, preserved his dignity without 
assuming importance, and Quesnel was de- 
pressed by his presence without exactly know- 
ing wherefore. 

After some general conversation, St. Aubert 
requested to speak with him alone ; and 
Emily, being left with Madame Quesnel, soon 
learned that a large party was invited to dine 
at the chateau, and was compelled to hear 
that nothing which was past and irremediable 
ought to prevent the festivity of the present 
hour. 

St. Aubert, when he was told that company 
were expected, felt a mixed emotion of disgust 
and indignation against the insensibility of 
Quesnel, which prompted him to return home 
immediately. But he was informed that 
Madame Cheron had been asked to meet 
him ; and when he looked at Emily, and 
considered that a time might come when the 
^lunity of her uncle would be prejudicial to 



her, he determined not to incur it himself, bjr 
conduct which would be resented as inde- 
corous, by the very persons who now showed 
so little sense of decorum. 

Among the visitors assembled at dinner 
were two Italian gentlemen, of whom one 
was named Montoni, a distant relation of 
Madame Quesnel, a man about forty, of an 
uncommonly handsome person, with features 
manly and expressive, but whose countenance 
exhibited, upon the whole, more of the haugh- 
tiness of command, and the quickness of 
discernment, than of any other character. 

Signor Cavigni, his friend, appeared to be 
about thirty — inferior in dignity, but equal to 
him in penetration of countenance, and supe- 
rior in insinuation of manner. 

Emily was shocked by. the salutation with 
which Madame Cheron met her father. 

' Dear brother,' said she, ' I am concerned 
to see vou look so very ill ; do, pray, have 
advice ! 

St. Aubert answered with a melancholy 
smile, that he felt himself much as usual : but 
Emily's fears made her now fancy that her 
father looked worse than he really did. 

Emily would have been amused by the new 
characters she saw, and the varied conversation 
that passed during dinner, which was served 
in a style of splendour she had seldom seen 
before, had her spirits been less oppressed. 
Of the guests, Signor Montoni was lately from 
Italy, and he spoke of the commotions which 
at that period agitated the country ; talked of 
party-differences with warmth, and then la- 
mented the probable consequences of the 
tumults. His friend spoke, with equal ardour, 
of the politics of his country ; praised the 
government and prosperity of Venice, and 
boasted of its decided superiority over all the 
other Italian states. He then turned to the 
ladies, and talked with the same eloquence of 
Parisian fashions, the French opera, and 
French manners ; and on the latter subject 
he did not fail to mingle what is so parti- 
cularly agreeable to French taste. The 
flattery was not detected by those to whom it 
was addressed, though its effects in producing 
submissive attention did not escape his obser- 
vation. When he could disengage himself 
from the assiduities of the other ladies, he 
sometimes addressed Emily : but she knew 
nothing of Parisian fashions, of Parisian 
operas ; and her modesty, simplicity, and 
correct manners, formed a decided contrast 
to those of her female companions. 

After dinner, St. Aubert stole from the 
room to view once more the old chestnut 
which Quesnel talked of cutting down. As 
he stood under its shade, and looked up 
among its branches, still luxuriant, and saw 
here and there the blue sky trembling be- 
tween them, the pursuits and events of his 
early days crowded fast to his mind, with the 
figures aj\d ^hax^GXet^ ojl \f«.Tw^^-A<3j«^^\sissi 



xS 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



gone from the earth ! and he now felt himself 
to be almost an insulated being, with nobody 
but his Emily for his heart to turn to. 

He stood lost amid the scenes of years 
which fancy called up, till the succession 
closed with the picture of his dying wife ; and 
he started away, to forget it, if possible, at 
the social board. , 

St. Aubert ordered his carriage at an early 
hour, and Emily observed that be was more 
than usually silent and dejected on the way 
home ; but she considered this to be the effect 
of his visit to a place which spoke so 
eloquently of former times, nor suspected 
that he had a cause of grief which he con- 
cealed from her. 

On entering the chateau she felt more de- 
Jjressed than ever, for she more than ever 
missed the presence of that dear parent, who, 
whenever she had been from home, used to 
welcome her return with smiles and fondness : 
now all was silent and forsaken ! 

But what reason and effort may fail to do, 
time effects : week after week passed away, 
and each, as it passed, stole something from 
the harshness of her affliction, till it was 
mellowed to that tenderness which the feeling 
heart cherishes as sacred. St. Aubert, on the 
contrary, visibly declined in health; though 
Emily, who had been so constantly with him, 
was almost the last person who observed it. 
His constitution had never recovered from the 
late attack of the fever ; and the succeeding 
shock it received from Madame St. Aubert's 
death had produced his present infirmity. His 
physician now ordered him to travel ; for it 
was perceptible that sorrow had seized upon 
his nerves, weakened as they had been by the 
preceding illness ; a variety of scene, it was 
probable, would, by amusing his mind, re- 
store them to their proper tone. 

For some days Emily was occupied in pre- 
parations to attend him ; and he, by endea- 
vours to diminish his expenses at home during 
the journey — a purpose which determined him 
at length to dismiss his domestics. 

Emily seldom opposed her father's wishes 
by questions or remonstrances, or she would 
now have asked why he did not take a servant, 
and have represented that his infirm health 
made one almost necessary. But when, on 
the eve of their departure, she found that he 
had dismissed Jacques, Francis, and Mary, 
and detained only Theresa, the old house- 
keeper, she was extremely surprised, and 
ventured to ask his reason for having done so. 

• To save expenses, my dear, ' he replied, ' we 
are going on an expensive excursion.' 

The physician liad prescribed the air of 

I^nguedoc and Province ; and St. Aubert 

determined therefore to travel leisurely along 

the shores of the Mediterranean, towards 

Provence. 

They retired early to their chamber on the 

njg^Jit before their departure : but Emily had a 



few books and other things to collect, and the 
clock had struck twelve before she had 
finished, or had remembered that some of her 
drawing instruments, which she meant to take 
with her, were in the parlour below. As she 
went to fetch these, she passed her father's 
room, and perceiving the door half open, 
concluded that he was in bis study ; for, since 
the death of Madame St. Aubert, it had been 
frequently his custom to rise from his restless 
bed, and go thither to compose his mind. 
When she was below stairs she looked into 
this room, but without finding him * ^nd as 
she returned to her chamber, she tapped at 
his door, and receiving no answer, stepped 
softly in, to be certain whether he was there. 

The room was dark, but a light glinmiered 
through some panes of glass that were placed 
in the upper part of a closet-door. 

Emily believed her father to be in the 
closet, and, surprised that he was up at 
so late an hour, apprehended he was un- 
well, and was going to inquire ; but con- 
sidering that her sudden appearance at this 
hour might alarm him, she removed her light 
to the staircase, and then stepped softly to 
the closet. 

On looking through the panes of glass, she 
saw him seated at a small table, with papers 
before him, some of which he was reading 
with deep attention and interest, during which 
he often wept and sobbed aloud. 

Emily, who had come to the door to learn 
whether her father was ill, was now de- 
tained there by a mixture of curiosity and 
tenderness. She could not witness his sorrow 
without being anxious to know the subject of 
it ; and she therefore continued to observe 
him in silence, concluding that those papers 
were letters of her late mother. 

Presently he kneeled down, and, with a 
look so solemn as she had seldom seen him 
assume, and which was mingled with a certain 
wild expression, that partook more of horror 
than of any other character, he prayed 
silently for a considerable time. 

When he rose, a ghastly paleness was on his 
countenance. Emily was hastily retiring ; but 
she saw him turn again to the papers, and she 
stopped. He took from among them a small 
case, and from thence a miniature picture. 
The rays of light fell strongly upon it, and 
she perceived it to be that of a lady but not 
of her mother. 

St. Aubert gazed earnestly and tenderly 
upon this portrait, put it to his lips, and then 
to his heart, and sighed with a convulsive 
force. 

Emily could scarcely believe what she saw 
to be real. She never knew till now that he 
had a picture of any other lady than her 
mother, much less that he had one which he 
evidently valued so highly ; but having looked 
repeaXedVy , lo be certain that it was not the re- 
s^mXteiwoll^^^dasJvft^V ^MjoRxv^b^^ became 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



X7 



entirely convinced that it was designed for 
that of some other person. 

At length St. Aubert returned the picture to 
its case ; and Emily, recollecting that she was 
intruding upon his private sorrows, softly 
withdrew from the chamber. 



CHAPTER III. 

* O how canst thou renounce the boundless store 
Of charms which Nature to her votary yields ? 
The warbling woodland, the resounding shore. 
The pomp of groves, and garniture of fields ; 
All that the genial ray of morning gilds. 
And all that echoes to the son§ of even ; 
All that the mountain's sheltenng bosom shields, 
And all the dread magnificence of heaven ; 

how canst thou renounce, and hope to be forgiven? 

These charms shall work thy soul's eternal health, 
And love, and gentleness, and joy, impart.' 

The Minstrel. 

St. Aubert, instead of taking the more 
direct road that ran along the feet of the 
Pyrenees to Languedoc, chose one that, 
winding over the heights, afforded more 
extensive views and greater variety of roman- 
tic scenery. He turned a little out of his way 
to take leave of M. ^Barreaux, whom he found 
botanizing in the wood near his chateau, and 
who, when he was told the purpose of St. 
Aubert's visit, expressed a degree of concern 
such as his friend had thought it was scarcely 
possible for him to feel on any similar oc- 
casion. They parted with mutual regret. 

' If any thing could have tempted me from 
my retirement,' said M. Barreaux, ' it would 
have been the pleasure of accompanying you 
on this little tour. I do not often offer com- 
phments ; you may therefore believe me when 

1 say that I shall look for your return with 
impatience, ' 

The travellers proceeded on their joUrney. 
As they ascended the heights, St. Aubert 
often looked back upon his chateau in the 
plain below ; tender images crowded to his 
mind ; his melancholy imagination suggested 
that he should return no more ; and though 
he checked this wandering thought, still he 
continued to look, till the haziness of distance 
blended his home with the general landscape, 
and St. Aubert seemed to 

* Drag at each remove a lengthening chain.' 

He and Emily continued sunk in musing 
silence for some leagues ; from which melan- 
choly reverie Emily first awoke, and her 
young fancy, struck with tlie grandeur of the 
objects around, gradually yielded to delight- 
ful impressions. The road now descended 
into glens, confined by stupendous walls of 
rock, gray and barren, except where shrubs 
fringed their summits, or patches of meagre 
vegetation tinted their recesses^ in which ^h^ 



wild goat was frequently browsing. And now 
the way led to the lofty cliffs, from whence 
the landscape was seen extending in all its 
magnificence. 

Emily could not restrain her transport as 
she looked over the pine forests of the moun- 
tains, upon the vast plains that (enriched with 
woods, towns, blushing vines, and plantations 
of almonds, palms, and olives) stretched 
along, till their various colours melted in 
distance into one harmonious hue, that 
seemed to unite earth with heaven. Through 
the whole of this glorious scene the majestic 
Garonne wandered, descending from its source 
among the Pyrenees, and winding its blue 
waves towards the Bay of Biscay. 

The ruggedness of the unfrequented road 
often obliged the wanderers to ahght from 
their little carriage ; but they thought them- 
selves amply rei>aid for this inconvenience by 
the grandeur of the scenes ; and, while the 
muleteer led his animals slowly over the 
broken ground, the travellers had leisure to 
linger amid these solitudes, and to indulge 
the sublime reflections, which softfen while 
they elevate the heart, and fill it with the 
certainty of a present God ! Still the enjoy- . 
ment of St. Aubert was touched with that / 
pensive melancholy which gives to every ob- t 
ject a mellower tint, and breathes a sacred f 
charm over all around. ■ 

They had provided against part of the evil 
to be encountered from a want of convenient 
inns, by carrying a stock of provisions in the 
carriage ; so that they might take refresh- 
ment on any pleasant spot, in the open air, 
and pass the nights wherever they should 
happen to meet with a comfortable cottage. 
For the mind also they had provided by a 
work on botany written by M. Barreaux, and 
by several of the Latin and Italian poets ; 
while Emily's pencil enabled her to preserve 
some of those combinations of forms which 
charmed her at every step. 

The loneliness of the road, where only now 
and then a peasant was seen driving his mule, 
or some mountaineer children at play among 
the rocks, heightened the effect of the 
scenery. St. Aubert was so much struck with 
it, that he determined, if he could hear of a 
road, to penetrate further among the moun- 
tains, and, bending his way rather more to 
the south, to emerge into Rousillon, and 
coast the Mediterranean along part of that 
country to Languedoc. 

Soon after mid-day they reached the sum- 
mit of one of those cliffs, which, bright with 
the verdure of palm-trees, adorn, like gems, 
the tremendous walls of the rocks, and which 
overlooked the greater part of Gascony and 
part of Languedoc. Here was shade, and 
the fresh water of a spring, that, gliding 
among the turf, under the trees, thence pre- 
cipitated itself from rock to rock, till its 
dashing mucmucs \i^t^ \q^n. K'a. ^^ •!^'^^'i»> 



x6 THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 

gone from the earth ! and he now felt himself few books and other thingfs to collect, and the 
to be almost an insulated being, with nobody clock had struck twelve before she had 

but his Emily for his heart to turn to. finished, or had remembered that some of her 

He stood lost amid the scenes of years drawing instruments, which she meant to take 

which fancy called np, till the succession with her, were in the parlour below. As she 
closed with the picture of his dying wife ; and went to fetch these, she passed her father's 

he started away, to forget it, if possible, at room, and perceiving the door half open, 

the social board. , concluded that he was in his study ; for, since 

St. Aubert ordered his carriage at an early the death of Madame St Aub^rt, it had been 

hour, and Emily observed that he was more frequently his custom to rise from his restless 
than usually silent and dejected on the way bed, and go thither to compose his mind, 

home ; but she considered this to be the effect When she was below stairs she looked into 
of his visit to a place which spoke so this room, but without finding him ; ^nd as 

eloquently of former times, nor suspected she returned to her chamb^, she tapped at 

that he had a cause of grief which he con- his door, and receiving no answer, stepped 

cealed from her. softly in, to be certain whether he was there. 

On entering the chateau she felt more de- The room was dark, but a light glimmered 

pressed than ever, for she more than ever through some panes of glass that were placed 

missed the presence of that dear parent, who, in the upper part of a dosetrdoor. 

whenever she had been from home, used to Emily beheved her iath^ to be in the 

welcome her return with smiles and fondness : closet, and, surprised that he was up at 

now all was silent and forsaken ! so late an hour, apprehended he was im- 

But what reason and effort may fail to do, well, and was going to inquire ; but con- 
time effects : week after week passed away, sidering that her sudden appearance at this 
and each, as it passed, stole something from hour might alarm him, she removed her light 
the harshness of her afSiction, till it was to the staircase, and then stepped softly to 
mellowed to that tenderness which the feeling the closet. 

heart cherishes as sacred. St. Aubert, on the On looking through the panes of glass, she 
contrary, visibly declined in health ; though saw him seated at a small table, with papers 
Emily, who had been so constantly with him, before him, some of which he was reading 
was almost the last person who observed it. with deep attention and interest, during which 
His constitution had never recovered from the he often wept and sobbed aloud, 
late attack of the fever ; and the succeeding Emily, who had come to the door to learn 
shock it received from Madame St. Aubert's whether her father was ill, was now de- 
death had produced his present infirmity. His tained there by a mixture of curiosity and 
physician now ordered him to travel; for it tenderness. She could not witness his sorrow 
was perceptible that sorrow had seized upon without being anxious to know the subject of 
his nerves, weakened as they had been by the it ; and she therefore continued to observe 
preceding illness ; a variety of scene, it was him in silence, concluding that those papers 
probable, would, by amusing his mind, re- were letters of her late mother, 
store them to their proper tone. Presently he kneeled down, and, with a 

For some days Emily was occupied in pre- look so solemn as she had seldom seen him 

parations to attend him ; and he, by endea- assume, and which was mingled with a certain 

vours to diminish his expenses at home during wild expression, that partook more of horror 

the journey — a purpose which determined him than of any other character, he prayed 

at length to dismiss his domestics. silently for a considerable time. 

Emily seldom opposed her father's wishes When he rose, a ghastlv paleness was on his 

by questions or remonstrances, or she would countenance. Emily was nastily retiring ; but 

now have asked why he did not take a servant, she saw him turn again to the papers, and she 

and have represented that his infirm health stopped. He took from among them a small 

made one almost necessary. But when, on case, and from thence a miniature picture, 

the eve of their departure, she found that he The rays of light fell strongly upon it, and 

had dismissed Jacques, Francis, and Mary, she perceived it to be that of a lady but not 

and detained only Theresa, the old house- of her mother. 

keeper, she was extremely surprised, and St. Aubert gazed earnestly and tenderly 

ventured to ask his reason for having done so. upon this portrait, put it to his hps, and then 

'Tosaveexpenses, my dear, 'he replied, 'we to his heart, and sighed with a convulsive 

are going on an expensive excursion. ' force. 

The physician had prescribed the air of Emily could scarcely believe what she saw 

Uanguedoc and Province ; and St. Aubert to be real. She never knew till now that he 

determined therefore to travel leisurely along had a picture of any other lady than her 

the shores of the Mediterranean, towards mother, much less that he had one which he 

Provence. evidently valued so highly ; but having looked 

They retired early to their chamber on the repeatedly, to be certain that it was not the re- 

n/s'Jit before their departure : but Emily had a s^mblaxKi^of Madam^St. Aubert, shQ becwie 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



X7 



entirely convinced that it was designed for 
that of some other person. 

At length St. Aubert returned the picture to 
its case ; and Emily, recollecting that she was 
intruding upon his private sorrows, softly 
withdrew from the chamber. 



CHAPTER III. 

* O how canst thou renounce the boundless store 
Of charms which Nature to her votary yields ? 
The warbling woodland, the resounding shore. 
The pomp of groves, and garniture of fields ; 
All that the genial ray of morning gilds. 
And all that echoes to the son§ of even ; 
All that the mountain's sheltering bosom shields, 
And all the dread magnificence of heaven ; 

how canst thou renounce, and hope to be forgiven? 

These charms shall work thy soul's eternal health, 
And love, and gentleness, and joy, impart.' 

The Minstrel. 

St. Aubert, instead of taking the more 
direct road that ran along the feet of the 
Pyrenees to Languedoc, chose one that, 
winding over the heights, afforded more 
extensive views and greater variety of roman- 
tic scenery. He turned a little out of his way 
to take leave of M. ^Barreaux, whom he found 
botanizing in the wood near his chateau, and 
who, when he was told the purpose of St. 
Aubert's visit, expressed a degree of concern 
such as his friend had thought it was scarcely 
possible for him to feel on any similar oc- 
casion. They parted with mutual regret. 

' If any thing could have tempted me from 
my retirement,' said M. Barreaux. ' it would 
have been the pleasure of accompanying you 
on this httle tour. I do not often offer com- 
pliments ; you may therefore believe me when 

1 say that I shall look for your return with 
impatience. ' 

The travellers proceeded on their joilrney. 
As they ascended the heights, St. Aubert 
often looked back upon his chateau in the 
plain below ; tender images crowded to his 
mind ; his melancholy imagination suggested 
that he should return no more ; and though 
he checked this wandering thought, still he 
continued to look, till the haziness of distance 
blended his home with the general landscape, 
and St. Aubert seemed to 

* Drag at each remove a lengthening chain.' 

He and Emily continued sunk in musing 
silence for some leagues ; from which melan- 
choly reverie Emily first awoke, and her 
young fancy, struck with tlie grandeur of the 
objects around, gradually yielded to delight- 
ful impressions. The road now descended 
into glens, confined by stupendous walls of 
rock, gray and barren, except where shrubs 
fringed their summits, or patches of meagre 
vegetation tinted their recesses, in which ^hQ 



wild goat was frequently browsing. And now 
the way led to the lofty cliffs, from whence 
the landscape was seen extending in all its 
magnificence. 

Emily could not restrain her transport as 
she looked over the pine forests of the moun- 
tains, upon the vast plains that (enriched with 
woods, towns, blushing vines, and plantations 
of almonds, palms, and olives) stretched 
along, till their various colours melted in 
distance into one harmonious hue, that 
seemed to unite earth with heaven. Through 
the whole of this glorious scene the majestic 
Garonne wandered, descending from its source 
among the Pyrenees, and winding its blue 
waves towards the Bay of Biscay. 

The ruggedness of the unfrequented road 
often obliged the wanderers to alight from 
their little carriage ; but they thought them- 
selves amply rei>aid for this inconvenience by 
the grandeur of the scenes ; and, while the 
muleteer led his animals slowly over the 
broken ground, the travellers had leisure to 
hnger amid these solitudes, and to indulge 
the subhme reflections, which softfen while 
they elevate the heart, and fill it with the 
certainty of a present God ! Still the enjoy- . 
ment of St. Aubert was touched with that / 
pensive melancholy which gives to every ob- i 
ject a mellower tint, and breathes a sacred ] 
charm over all around. 

They had provided against part of the evil 
to be encountered from a want of convenient 
inns, by carrying a stock of provisions in the 
carriage ; so that they might take refresh- 
ment on any pleasant spot, in the open air, 
and pass the nights wherever they should 
happen to meet with a comfortable cottage. 
For the mind also they had provided by a 
work on botany written by M. Barreaux, and 
by several of the Latin and Italian poets ; 
while Emily's pencil enabled her to preserve 
some of those combinations of forms which 
charmed her at every step. 

The loneliness of the road, where only now 
and then a peasant was seen driving his mule, 
or some mountaineer children at play among 
the rocks, heightened the effect of the 
scenery. St. Aubert was so much struck with 
it, that he determined, if he could hear of a 
road, to penetrate further among the moun- 
tains, and, bending his way rather more to 
the south, to emerge into Rousillon, and 
coast the Mediterranean along part of that 
country to Languedoc. 

Soon after mid-day they reached the sum- 
mit of one of those cliffs, which, bright with 
the verdure of palm-trees, adorn, like gems, 
the tremendous walls of the rocks, and which 
overlooked the greater part of Gascony and 
part of Languedoc. Here was shade, and 
the fresh water of a spring, that, gliding 
among the turf, under the trees, thence pre- 
cipitated itself from rock to rock, till its 
dashing mucwwiis \i^t^ \q^n. Na. ^^ •j^-^'k?.^ 



z8 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

though its white foam was long seen amid the down. Emily was terrified almost to faint- 
darkness of the pines below, ing ; and St. Aubert, ^apprehending still 
This was a spot well suited for rest, and greater danger from suddenly stopping the 
the travellers alighted to dine, while the mules driver, was compiled to sit quietly, and. trust 
were unharnessed to browse on the savoury his fate to the strength and discretion of the 
herbs that enriched this summit. mules, who seemed to possess a greater portion 
It was some time before St. Aubert and of the latter quality than their master ; for 
Emily could withdraw their attention from they carried the travellers safely into the 
the surrounding objects, so as to partake of valley, and there stopped upon the brink of 
their little repast. Seated in the shade of the the rivulet that watered it. 
palms, St. Aubert pointed out to her obscrva- Leaving the splendour of extensive pros- 
tion the course of the rivers, the situation of pects, they now entered this narrow valley, 
great towns, and the boundaries of provinces, screened by 

which science, rather than the eye, enabled <„ i i m j -rv • n 

him to describe. NotwithstancUng this oceu- gSe^Jw b?t*.SL'^tbJ?fSi3;fv^ s^' 
pation, when he had talked awhile, he .^ -• • » . 

suddenly became silent, thoughtful, and tears The scene of barrenness was here and there 
often swelled to his eyes ; which Emily ob- interrupted by the spreading branches of the 
served, and the sympathy of her own heart larch and cedar, which threw their gloom over 
told her their cause. The scene before them the cliff, or athwart the torrent that rolled in 
bore some resemblance, though it was on a the vale. No living creature appeared — except 
much grander scale, to a favourite one of the the lizard scrambling among the rocks, and 
late Madame St. Aubert, within view of the often hanging upon points so dangerous that 
fishing-house. They both observed this, and fancy shrunk from the view of them. This 
thought how delighted she would have been was such a scene as Salvatcr would have 
with the present landscape, while they knew chosen, had he then existed, for his canvass, 
that her eyes must -never never more open St. Aubert, impressed by the romantic cha- 
upon this world. St. Aubert remembered the racter of the place, almost expected to see 
last time of his visiting that spot in company banditti start from behind some projecting 
with her, and also the mournfully presaging rock, and he kept his hand upon the arms 
thoughts which had then arisen in his mind, with which he always travelled, 
and were now, even thus soon, realized ! The As they advanced, the valley opened ; its 
recollections subdued him, and he abruptly savage features gradually softened, and to- 
rose from his seat, and walked away to where wards evening thev were among heathy 
no eye could observe his grief. mountains stretched m far perspective, along 

When he returned, his countenance had which the solitary sheep-bedl was heard, and 
recovered its usual serenity : he took Emily's the voice of the shepherd calling his wander- 
hand, pressed it affectionately, without speak- ing flocks to the nightly fold. His cabin, 
ing, and soon after called to the muleteer, partly shadowed by the cork-tree and the ilex, 
who sat at a httlc distance, concerning a road which St. Aubert observed to flourish in higher 
among the mountains towards Rousillon. regions of the air than any other trees, except 
Michael said there were several that way, but the fir, was all the human habitation that yet 
he did not know how far they extended, or appeared. Along the bottom of this vaUey 
even whether they were passable ; and St, the most vivid verdure was spread ; and in 
Aubert, who did not intend to travel after the little hollow recesses of the mountains, 
sun-set, asked what village they could reach under the shade of the oak and chesnut, herds 
about that time. The nmleteer calculated of cattle were grazing. Groups of them, too, 
that they could easily reach Mateau, which were often seen reposing on Uie banks of the 
was in their present road; but that if they rivulet, or laving theu- sides in the cool stream, 
took a road that sloped more to the south, and sipping its wave. 

towards Rousillon, there was a hamlet, which I'he sun was now setting upon the valley — 

he thought they could gain before the evening its last light gleamed upon the water, and 

shut in. heightened the rich yellow and purple tints of 

St. Aubert, after some hesitation, deter- the heath and broom that overspread the 

mined to take the latter course ; and Michael, mountains. St. Aubert inquired of Michael 

having finished his meal and harnessed his the distance to the hamlet he had mentioned, 

mules, again set forward — but soon stopped ; but the man could not with certainty tell ; and 

and St. Aubert saw him doing homage to a Emily began to fear that he had mistaken the 

cross that stood on a rock impending over road. Here was no human being to assist or 

their way. Having concluded his devotions, direct them : they had left the shepherd and 

he smacked his wliip in the air, and, in spite his cabin far behind ; and the scene became 

of the rough road and the pain of liis poor so oloscured in twilight, that the eye could not 

miiies /which he had been lately lamenting), follow the distant perspective of the valley, in 

rattJccl, in n full gallop, along the edge ot a search of a cottage or a hamlet. A glow of 

precipice which it made the eye dizzy to look l\\e ViQiViQu ^\\\\ xwwVad llie west, and this 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHd. 



t^ 



was of some little use to the travellers. 
Michael seemed endeavouring to keep up his 
courage by singling ; liis music, however, was 
not of a kind to disperse melancholy ; he 
sung, in a sort of chant, one of the most 
dismal ditties his present auditors had ever 
heard, and St. Aubert at length discovered it 
to be a vesper-hymn to his favourite saint. 

They travelled on, sunk in that thoughtful 
melancholy with which twilight and solitude 
impress the mind. Michael had now ended 
his ditty ; and nothing was heard but the 
drowsy murmur of the breeze among the 
woods, and its light flutter as it blew freshly 
into the carriage. They were at length roused 
by the sound of fire-arms. St. Aubert called 
to the muleteer to stop, and they listened. 
The noise was not repeated ; but presently 
they heard a rustling among the brakes. St. 
Aubert drew forth a pistol, and ordered 
Michael to proceed as fast as possible ; who 
had not long obeyed before a horn sounded 
that made the valleys ring. He looked again 
from the window, and then saw a young man 
spring from the bushes into the road, followed 
by a couple of dogs. The stranger was in a 
hunter's dress ; his gun was slung across his 
shoulders ; the hunter's horn hung from his 
belt ; and in his hand was a small pike, which, 
as he held it, added to the manly grace of his 
figure, and assisted the agility of his steps. 

After a moment's hesitation, St. Aubert 
again stopped the carriage, and waited till he 
came up, that they might inquire concerning 
the hamlet they were in search of. The 
stranger informed him that it was only half a 
league distant ; that he was going thither 
himself, and would readily show the way. 
St Aubert thanked him for the offer, and, 
pleased with his chevalier-like air and open 
countenance, asked him to take a seat in the 
carriage ; wliich the stranger, with an ac- 
knowledgment, declined, adding that he 
would keep pace with the mules. 

* But I fear you will be wretchedly accom- 
modated,' said he ; ' the inhabitants of these 
mountains are a simple people, who are not 
only without the luxuries of life, but almost 
destitute of what in other places are held to 
be its necessaries. ' 

' I perceive you are not one of its inha- 
bitants, sir,' said St. Aubert. 

• No, sir ; I am only a wanderer here.* 
The carriage drove on ; and the increasing 

dusk made the travellers very thankful that 
they had a guide ; the frequent glens, too, 
that now opened among the mountains, 
would likewise have added to their perplexity. 
Emily, as she looked up one of these, saw 
something at a great distance like a bright 
cloud in the air. 

' What light is yonder, sir?' said she. 

St. Aubert looked, and perceived that it was 
the snowy summit of a mountain, so much 
higher than any around it, that it still reflected 



the sun's rays, while those below lay in deep 
shade. 

At length the village lights were seen to 
twinkle through the dusk, and soon after, 
some cottages were discovered in the valley, 
or rather were seen by reflection in the stream, 
on whose margin they stood, and which still 
gleamed with tlie evening light. 

The stranger now came up ; and St. Aubert, 
on further inquiry, found not only that there 
was no inn in the place, but not any sort of 
house of public reception. The stranger, 
however, offered to walk on, and inquire for 
a cottage to accommodate them ; for which 
flirther civility St. Aubert returned his thanks. 
and said, that, as the village was so near, he 
would alight and walk with him. ICmily 
followed slowly in the carriage. 

On the way St. Aubert asked his companion 
what success he had had in the chase. 

' Not much, sir,' he replied ; ' nor do I aim 
at it : I am pleased with the country, and mean 
to saunter a^y a few weeks among its scenes : 
my dogs I take with me more for companion- 
ship than for game : this dress, too, gives me 
an ostensible business, and procures me that 
respect from the people which would, perhaps, 
be refused to a lonely stranger who had no 
visible motive for coming among them.' 

' I admire your taste,' said St. Aubert, 'and 
if I were a younger man, should like to pass a 
few weeks m your way exceedingly. I, too, 
am a wanderer ; but neither my plaii nor pur- 
suits are exactly like yours. I go in search of 
health as much as of amusement. ' St. Aubert 
sighed, and paused ; and then, seeming to 
recollect himself, he resumed : ' If I can hear 
of a tolerable road that shall afford decent 
accommodation, it is my intention to pass 
into Rousillon, and along the sea-shore to 
Languedoc. You, sir, seem to be acquainted 
with the country, and can, perhaps, give me 
information on the subject?* 

The stranger said that what information he 
could give was entirely at his service ; and 
then mentioned a road rather more to the east, 
which led to a town, whence it would be easy 
to proceed into Rousillon. 

They now arrived at the village, and com- 
menced their search for a cottage that would 
afford a night's lodging. In several which 
they entered, ignorance, poverty, and mirth 
seemed equally to prevail ; and the owners 
eyed St. Aubert with a mixture of curiosity 
and timidity. Nothing like a bed could be 
found ; and he had ceased to inquire for one, 
when Emily joined him, >Vho observed the 
languor of her father's countenance, and 
lamented that he had taken a road so ill pro- 
vided with the comforts necessary for an 
invalid. Other cottages which they examined 
seemed somewhat less savage than the former, 
consisting of two rooms, if such they could 
be called— the first of tba^at o^c>\'^vi^\s^\s\>^^'5. 
and pvgs ; lYie ^^on^ \yj ^'^ Saxca.^ . >^Vv^ 



to 



THE M VASTER lES OF UDOLPHO, 



generally consisted of six or eight children, 
with their parents, who slept on beds of skins 
and dried beech leaves spread upon a mud 
floor. Here light was admitted, and smoke 
discharged through an aperture in the roof ; 
and here the scent of spirits (for the travelling 
smugglers who haunted the Pyrenees had 
made the rude people familiar with the use of 
liquors) was generally perceptible enough. 

Emily turned from such scenes, and looked 
at her father with anxious tenderness, which 
the young stranger seemed to observe ; for, 
drawing St. Aubert aside, he made him an 
offer of his own bed. 

' It is a decent one,' said he, when com- 
pared with what we have just seen, yet such 
as in other circumstances I should be ashamed 
to offer you. ' 

St. Aubert acknowledged how much he felt 
himself obliged by this kindness ; but refused 
to accept it till the young stranger would take 
no denial. 

' Do not give me the pain of knowing, sir,' 
said he, ' that an invalid like you lies on hard 
skins while I sleep in a bed. Besides, sir, 
your refusal wounds my pride ; I must believe 
you think my offer unworthy your acceptance. 
Let me show you the way. I have no doubt 
my landlady can accommodate this young lady 
also.' 

St. Aubert at length consented, that, if this 
could be done, he would accept the kindness; 
though he felt rather surprised that the stranger 
had proved himself so deficient in gallantry as 
to administer to the repose of an infirm man 
rather than to that of a very lovely young 
woman ; for he had not once offered the 
room for Emily. But she thought not of her- 
self ; and the animated smile she gave him 
told how much she felt herself obliged for the 
preference of her father. 

On their way, the stranger, whose name was 
Valancourt, stepped on first to speak to his 
hostess ; and she came out to welcome St. 
Aubert into a cottage much superior to any 
he had seen. This good woman seemed very 
willing to accommodate the strangers, who 
were soon compelled to accept the only two 
beds in the place. Eggs and milk were the 
only food the cottage afforded ; but against 
scarcity of provisions St. Aubert had provided ; 
and he requested Valancourt to stay and pai*- 
take with him of less homely fare — an invi- 
tation which was readily accepted ; and they 
passed an hour in intelligent conversation. 
St. Aubert was much pleased with the manly 
frankness, simplicity, and keen susceptibility 
to the grandeur of nature which his new ac- 
quaintance discovered ; and, indeed, he had 
often been heard to say, that without a certain 



simplicity of heart this taste could not exist 
in any strong degree. 

The conversation was interrupted by a vio- 
lent uproar without, in which the voice of the 
muleteer was heard above every other sound. 
Valancourt started from his seat, and went to 
inquire the occasion; but the dispute con- 
tinued so long afterwards that St. Aubert went 
himself, and found Michael quarrelling with 
the hostess because she had refused to let his 
mules lie in a little room where he and three 
of her sons were to pass the night. The 
place was Mn*etched enough, but there was no 
other for these people to sleep in ; and, with 
somewhat more of delicacy than was usual 
among the inhabitants of this wild tract of 
country, she persisted in refusing to let the 
animals have the same bed-chamber with her 
children. This was a tender point with the 
muleteer : his honour was wounded when his 
mules were treated with disrespect, and he 
would have received a blow, perhaps, with 
more meekness. He declared that his beasts 
were as honest beasts and as good beasts as 
any in the whole province ; and that they had 
a right to be well treated wherever they went 

' They are as harmless as lambs,' said he, ' if 
people don't affront them. I never knew them 
behave themselves acoiss above once or twice 
in my life, and then they had good reason for 
doing so. Once indeed they, kicked at a boy's 
leg that lay asleep in the stable, and broke it ; 
but I told them they were out there : and by 
St. Anthony ! I believe they understood me, 
for they never did so again. 

He concluded this eloquent harangue with 
protesting that they should share with him, go 
where he would. 

The dispute was at length settled by Valan- 
court, who drew the hostess aside, and desired 
she would let the muleteer and his beasts have 
the place in question to themselves, while her 
sons should have the bed of skins designed for 
him, for that he would wrap himself in his 
cloak, and sleep on the bench by the cottage 
door. But this she thought it her duty to 
oppose ; and she felt it to be her inclination 
to disappoint the muleteer. Valancourt, how- 
ever, was positive ; and the tedious affair was 
at length settled. 

It was late when St. Aubert and Emily 
retired to their rooms, and Valancourt to his 
station at the door, which, at this mild season, 
he preferred to a close cabin and a bed oif 
skins. St. Aubert was somewhat surprised to 
find in his room volumes of Homer, Horace, 
and Petrarch ; but the name of Valancourt, 
written in them, told him to whom they 
belonged. 



TtiE MVSTERIE^ OF UbOLPHO, 



21 



CHAPTER IV. 

* In truth, he was a strange and wayward wight, 
Fond of each gentle and each dreadful scene : 
In darkness and in storm he found delight ; 
Nor less than when on ocean-wave serene 
The southern sun diffused his dazzling sheen. 
Even sad vicissitude amused his soul ; 
And if a sigh would sometimes intervene, 
And down his cheeks a tear of pity roll, 
A sigh, a tear, so sweet, he wish'd not to control.' 

The Minstrel. 

St. Aubert awoke at an early hour, re- 
freshed by sleep, and desirous to set forward. 
He invited the stranger to breakfast with him ; 
and, talking again of the road, Valancourt 
said that some months past he had travelled 
as far as Beaujeu, which was a town of some 
consequence on the way to Rousillon. He 
recommended it to St. Aubert to take that 
route ; and the latter determined to do so. 

The road from this hamlet, said Valancourt, 
a»d that to Beaujeu, part at the distance of 
about a league and a half from hence : if you 
will give me leave, I will direct your muleteer 
so far. I must wander somewhere ; and your 
company would make this a pleasanter ramble 
than any other I could take. 

St. Aubert thankfully accepted his offer, 
and they set out together — the young stranger 
on foot ; for he refused the invitation of St. 
Aubert to take a seat in his litde carriage. 

The road wound along the feet of the 
mountains, through a pastoral valley bright 
with verdure, and varied with groves of dwarf 
oak, beech and sycamore, under whose 
branches herds of cattle reposed. The moun- 
tain-ash, too, and the weeping birch, often 
threw their pendent foliage over the steeps 
above, where the scanty soil scarcely con- 
cealed their roots, and where their light 
branches waved to every breeze that fluttered 
from the mountains. 

The travellers were frequently met at this 
early hour (for the sun had not yet risen upon 
the valley) by shepherds driving immense 
flocks from their folds to feed upon the hills. 
St. Aubert had set out thus early, not only 
that he might enjoy the first appearance of 
sun-rise, but that he might inhale the first 
pure breath of morning, which above all 
things is refroshing to the spirits of the 
invalid. In these regions it was particularly 
so, where an abundance of wild flowers and 
aromatic herbs breathed forth their essence 
on«the air. 

The dawn, which softened the scenery with 
its peculiar gray tint, now dispersed, and 
Emily watched the progress of the day, first 
trembling on the tops of the highest cliffs, 
then touching them with splendid light, while 
their sides and the vale below were still 
wrapped in dewy mist. Meanwhile the sullen 
gray of the eastern clouds began to blush, 
then to redden, and then to glow with a 
thousand colours, till the golden light darted 



over all the air, touched the lower points of 
the mountain's brow, and glanced in long 
sloping beams upon the valley and its stream. 
All nature seemed to have awakened from 
death into life. The spirit of Sl Aubert was 
renovated. His heart was full ; he wept : 
and his thoughts ascended to the Great 
Creator. 

Emily wished to trip along the turf, so 
green and bright with dew, and to taste the 
full delight of that liberty which the izard 
seemed to enjoy as he bounded along the 
brow of the cliffs ; while Valancourt often 
stopped to speak with the travellers, and with 
social feeling to point out to them the peculiar 
objects of his admiration. 

St. Aubert was pleased with him : Here is 
the real ingenuousness and ardour of youth, 
said he to himself ; this young man has never 
been at Paris. 

He was sorry when they came to the spot 
where the roads parted ; and his heart took a 
more affectionate leave of him than is usual 
after so short an acquaintance. 

Valancourt talked long by the side of the 
carriage ; seemed more than once to be 
going, but still lingered, and appeared to 
search anxiously for topics of conversation to 
account for his delay. At length he took 
leave. 

As he went, St. Aubert observed him look 
with an earnest and pensive eye at Emily, who 
bowed to him with a countenance full of 
timid sweetness, while the carriage drove on. 
St. Aubert, for whatever reason, soon after 
looked from the window, and saw Valancourt 
standing upon the bank of the road, resting 
on his pike with folded arms, and following 
the carriage with his eyes. He waved his 
hand, and Valancourt, seeming to awake 
from his reverie, returned the salute, and 
started away. 

The aspect of the country now began to 
change, and the travellers soon found them- 
selves among mountains covered from their 
bases nearly to their summits with forests of 
gloomy pine, except where a rock of granite 
shot up from the vale, and lost its snowy top 
in the clouds. The rivulet, which had hither- 
to accompanied them, now expanded into a 
river ; and flowing deeply and silently along, 
reflected as in a mirror, the blackness of the 
impending shades. 

Sometimes a cliff was seen lifting its bold 
head above the woods and the vapours that 
floated mid-way down the mountains ; and 
sometimes a face of perpendicular marble 
rose from the water's edge, over which the 
larch threw his gigantid arms, here scathed 
with lightning, and there floating in luxuriant 
foliage. 

They continued to travel over a rough and 
unfrequented road, seeing now and then at a 
distance the solitary shepherd, with Ms. da*^. 
stalking along \.\i^ \^\e.>i, wA >Qsax\Tv'5» ^-^n 



^ 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



poured its sparkling flood high among the 
woods. 

Valancourt's indisposition detained the tra- 
vellers at Beaujeu several days, during which 
intcrN'al St. Aubert had observed his disposi- 
,tion and his talents with the philosophic in- 
quiry so natural to him. He saw a frank and 
; generous nature, full of ardour, highly sus- 
}i ceptible of whatever is grand and beautiful, 
^ut impetuous, wild, and somewhat romantic. 
Valancourt had known little of the world. 
His perceptions were clear, and his feelings 
just ; his indignation of an unworthy or his 
admiration of a generous action were ex- 
pressed in terms of equal vehemence. St. 
Aubert sometimes smiled at his warmth, but 
seldom checked it ; and often repeated to him- 
self, ' This young man has never been at 
Paris.' A sigh sometimes followed this silent 
ejaculation. He determined not to leave 
Valancourt till he should be perfectly re- 
covered ; and, as he was now well enough to 
travel, though not able to manage his horse, 
St. Aubert invited him to accompany him for 
a few days in the carriage. This he the more 
readily did, since he had discovered that 
Valancourt was of a family of the same name 
in Gascony, with whose respectability he was 
well acquainted. The latter accepted the offer 
with great pleasure, and they a<?ain set for- 
ward among these romantic wilds towards 
Rousillon. 

They travelled leisurely, stopping wherever 
a scene uncommonly grand appeared ; fre- 
quendy alighting to walk to an eminence, 
whither the mules could not go, from which 
the prospect opened in greater magnificence ; 
and often sauntering over hillocks covered 
with lavender, wild thyme, juniper, and 
tamarisk, and under the shades of woods, 
between whose boles they caught the long 
mountain vista, sublime beyond anything that 
Emily had ever imagined. 

St. Aubert sometimes amused himself with 
botanising, while Valancourt and Emily strolled 
on ; he pointing out to her notice the objects 
that particularly charmed him, and reciting 
beautiful passages from such of the Latin and 
Italian poets as he had heard her admire. In 
the pauses of conversation, when he thought 
himself not observed, he frequently fixed his 
eyes pensively on her countenance, which ex- 
pressed with so much animation the taste and 
energy of her mind ; and when he spoke 
again there was a peculiar tenderness in the 
tone of his voice, that defeated any attempt 
to conceal his sentiments. By degrees these 
silent pauses became more frequent ; till 
Emily, only, betrayed an anxiety to interrupt 
thcni ; and she, who had been hitherto re- 
served, would now talk again, and again, of 
the woods and the valleys and the mountains, 
to avoid the danger of sympathy and silence. 

From Beaujeu the road had constantly 
ascended, conducting the travellers into the 



higher regions of the air, where immense 
glacis's exhibited their frozen horrors, and 
eternal snow whitened the summits of the 
mountains. They often paused to contem- 
plate these stupendous scenes, and, seated on 
some wild cliff, where only the ilex or the 
larch could flourish, looked over dark forests 
of fir, and precipices where human foot had 
never wandered, into the glen — so deep, that 
the thunder of the torrent, which was seen to 
foam along the bottom, was scarcely heard to 
murmur. Over these crags rose others of 
stupendous height and fantastic shape ; some 
shooting into cones ; others impending far 
over their base, in huge masses of granite, 
along whose broken ridges was often lodged 
a weight of snow, that, trembling even to the 
vibration of a sound, threatened to bear 
destruction in its course to the vale. Around, 
on every side, far as the eye could penetrate, 
were seen only forms of grandeur — the long 
perspective of motmtain tops, tinged with 
ethereal blue, or white with snow ; valleys of 
ice, and forests of gloomy fir. The serenity 
and clearness of the air in these high regions 
were particularly delightful to the travellers ; 
it seemed to inspire them with a finer spirit, 
and diffused an indescribable complacency 
over their minds. They had no words to ex- 
press the sublime emotions they felt. A 
solenm expression characterised the feelings 
of St. Aubert ; tears often came to his eyes, 
and he frequently walked away from his com- 
panions. Valancourt now and then spoke, to 
point to Emily's notice some feature of the 
scene. The thinness of the atmosphere, 
through which every object came so distinctiy 
to the eye, surprised and deluded her, who 
could scarcely believe that objects which ap- 
peared so near, were in reahty so distant. 
The deep silence of these solitudes was 
broken only at intervals by the scream of the 
vultures seen cowering round some cliff below, 
or by the cry of the eagle sailing high in die 
air ; except when the travellers Ostened to the 
hollow thunder that sometimes muttered at 
their feet. While, above, the deep blue of 
the heavens was unobscm^d by the lightest 
cloud, half way down the mountains long 
billows of vapour were frequentiy seen rolling, 
now wholly excluding the country below, and 
now opening, and partially reveahng its 
features. Emily delighted to observe the 
grandeur of these clouds as they changed in 
shape and tints, and to watch their various 
effect on the lower world, whose features, 
partly veiled, were contmually assuming new 
forms of sublimity. 

After traversing these regions for many 
leagues, they began to descend towards 
Rousillon, and features of beauty then mingled 
with the scene. Yet the travellers did not 
look back without some regret to the sublime 
objects they had quitted ; though the eye, 
iaUgued \y\{h t,hc cxtensioo of its powers, was 



T^E MYSTERIES OP VDOLPHO. 35 

glad to rejiose oft tlie verdure of woods and on the cliff overshadowed with {^incs. It 
pastures, that now hung on the margin of the appeared that they could not be far from 
river below ; to view again the humble cottage some small town. St. Aubert bade the mule- 
shaded bv cedars, the playful group of moun- teer stop, and then called to the children to 
taineer children, and the flowery nooks that inquire if he was near Montigny ; but the 
appeared among the hills. distance, and the roaring of the waters, would 

As they descended, they saw at a distance, not suffer his voice to be heard ; and the crags 
on the right, one of the grand passes of the adjoining the bridge were of such tremendous 
Pyrenees into Spain, gleaming with its battle- height and steepness, that to have climbed 
ments and towers to the splendour of the either would have been scarcely practicable to 
setting rays ; yellow tops of woods colouring a person unacquainted with tne ascent. St. 
the steeps below, while far above aspired the Aubert, therefore, did not waste more mo- 
snowy points of the moimtains, still reflecting ments in delay. They continued to travel 
a rosy hue. long after twilight had obscured the road, 

St. Aubert began to look out for the little wliich was so broken, that, now thinking it 

town he had been directed to by the people of safer to walk than to ride, they all alighted. 

Beaujeu, and where he meant to pass the The moon was rising, but her light was yet 

night ; but no habitation yet appeared. Of too feeble to assist them. While they stepped 

its distance Valancourt could not assist him carefully on, they heard the vesper-bell of a 

to judge, for he had never been so far along convent. The twilight would not permit 

this chain of Alps before. There was, how- them to distinguish anything like a building, 

ever, a road to guide them ; and there could but the sounds seemed to come from some 

be little doubt that it was the right one ; for, woods that overhung an- acclivity to the right, 

since they had left Beaujeu, there had been no Valancourt proposed to go in search of this 

variety of tracks to perplex or mislead. convent. 

The sun now gave his last light, and St. ' If they will not accommodate us with a 

Aubert bade the muleteer proceed with all night's lodging,' said he, ' they may certainly ' 

possible dispatch. He found, indeed, the inform us how far we are from Montigny, and 

lassitude of illness return upon him, after a direct us towards it. ' 

day of uncommon fatigue both of body and He was bounding forward, without waiting 

mind, and he longed for repose. His anxiety St. Aubert's reply, when the latter stopped 

was not soothed by observing a numerous him. 

train, consisting of men, horses, and loaded 'I am very weary,' said St. Aubert, 'and 

mules, winding down the steeps of an opposite wish for nothing so much as for immediate 

mountain, appearing and disappearing at inter- rest. We will all go to the convent ; your good 

vals among the woods, so that its numbers looks would defeat our purpose ; but when 

pould not *be judged of. Something bright, they see mine and Emily's exliausted counte- 

like arms, glanced in the setting ray, and the nance, they will scarcely deny us repose. ' 

mihtary dress was distinguishable upon the As he said this, he took Emily's arm within 

men who were in the van, and on others his, and, telling Michael to wait a while in 

scattered among the troop that followed, the road with the carriage, they began to 

As these wound into the vale, the rear of the ascend towards the woods, guided by the bell 

party emerged from the woods, and exhibited of the convent. His steps were feeble, and 

a band of soldiers. St. Aubert's apprehensions Valancourt offered him his arm, which he 

now subsided ; he had no doubt that the train accepted. The moon now threw a faint light 

before him consisted of smugglers, who, in over their path, and, soon after, enabled them 

conveying prohibited goods over the Pyrenees, to distinguish some towers rising above the 

had been encountered and conquered by a tops of the woods. Still following the note of 

party of troops. the bell, they entered the shade of those woods, 

The travellers had lingered so long among lighted only by the moon-beams, that glided 

the sublimer scenes of these mountains, that down between the leaves, and threw a tremu- 

they found themselves entirely mistaken in lous uncertain gleam upon the steep track 

their calculation that they could reach Mon- they were winding. The gloom, and the 

tigny at sun-set ; but, as they wound along silence that prevailed (except when the bell 

the valley, they saw, on a rude Alpine bridge returned upon the air), together with the 

that united two lofty crags of the glen, a group wildness of the surrounding scene, struck 

of mountaineer children amusing themselves Emily with a degree of fear, which, however, 

with dropping pebbles into a torrent below, the voice and conversation of Valancourt 

and watching the stones plunge into the water, somewhat repressed. 

that threw up its white spray high in the air When they had been some time ascending, 

as it received them, and returned a sullen St. Aubert complained of weariness ; and they 

sound, which the echoes of the mountains stopped to rest upon a little green summit, 

])rolonged. UnJer the bridge was seen a where the' trees opened, and admitted the 

perspective of the valley, with its cataract moon-light. He sat down upon the turf, 

descending among the rocks, and a cottag;e l:e ween Emily ?VT\dV;x\a.Tvco\\T\.. 'Wi.Yv^V;^^ 



^ 



THE MVSTERlMS OF VDOLPHO. 



now ccnscU, and the deep repose of the scene 
was undisturbed by any sound ; for the low 
dull murmur of some distant torrent might be 
said to soothe rather than to interrupt the 
silence. Before them extended the valley they 
had quitted : its rocks and woods to the left, 
just silvered by the rays, formed a contrast to 
the deep shadow that involved the opposite 
cliffs, whose fringed summits only were tipped 
with light ; while the distant perspective of 
the valley was lost in the yellow mist of moon- 
light. The tra\'ellers sat for some time wrapt 
in the complacency which such scenes inspire. 

' These scenes,' said Valancourt, at length, 
• soften the heart like the notes of sweet music, 
and inspire that delicious melancholy which 
no person, who had felt it once, would resign 
for the gayest pleasures. They waken our 
best and purest feelings ; disposing us to 
benevolence, pity, and friendship. Those 
whom I love, I always seem to love more in 
such an hour as this. ' His voice trembled, and 
he paused. 

St. Aubert was silent : Emily perceived a 
warm tear fall upon the hand he held ; she 
knew the object of his thoughts — hers, too, 
had for some time been occupied by the re- 
membrance of her mother. He seemed by 
an effort to rouse himself. * Yes, ' said he, with 
a half-suppressed sigh, ' the memory of those 
we love — of times for ever past ! — m such an 
hour as this steals upon the mind like a strain 
of distant music in the stillness of night — 
all tender and harmonious as this landscape, 
sleeping in the mellow moon-light. ' After a 
pause of a moment, St. Aubert added, ' I have 
always fancied that I thought with more 
clearness and precision at such an hour, than 
at any other; and that heart must be in- 
sensible in a great degree, that does not soften 
to its influence. But many such there are. ' 

Valancourt sighed. 

'Are there, indeed, many such?' said 
Emily. 

'A few years hence, my dear Emily,' re- 
plied St. Aubert, ' and you may smile at the 
recollection of that question— if you do not 
weep to it. But come, I am somewhat re- 
freshed : let us proceed. ' 

Having emerged from the woods, they saw, 
upon a turfy hillock above, the .convent of 
which they were in search, A high wall that 
surrounded it, led them to an ancient gate, 
at which they knocked ; and the poor monk 
who opened it conducted them into a small 
adjoining room, where he desired they would 
wait while he informed the superior of their 
request. 

In this interval several friars came in sepa- 
rately to look at them ; and at length the first 
monk returned, and they followed him to a 
room where the superior was sitting in an 
arm-chair, with a large folio volume, printed" 
in black letter, open on a desk before him. 
He received them with courtesy, though he 



did not rise from his seat ; and, having asked 
them a few questions, granted their request. 

After a short conversation, formal and 
solemn on the part of the superior, they 
withdrew to the apartment where they were 
to sup ; and Valancourt, whom one of the 
inferior friars civilly desired to accoiftpany, 
went to seek Michael and his mules. They 
had not descended half way down the cliflfs 
before they heard the voice of the muleteer 
echoing far and wide. 

Sometimes he called on St. Aubert, and 
sometimes on Valancourt ; who having at 
length convinced him that he had nothing to 
fear, either for himself or his master, and 
having disposed of him for the night in a 
cottage on the skirts of the woods, returned 
to sup with his friends on such sober fare as 
the monks thought it prudent to set before 
them. 

While St. Aubert was too much indisposed 
to share it, Emily, in her anxiety for her 
father, forgot hersdf ; and Valancourt, silent 
and thoughtful, yet never inattentive to them, 
appeared particularly solicitious to accom- 
modate and relieve St Aubert ; who often 
observed, while his daughter was pressing him 
to eat, or adjusting the pillow she had x^aced 
in the back of his arm-chair, that Valancourt 
fixed on her a look of pensive tenderness, 
which she was not displeased to understand. 

They separated at an eariy hour, and re^ 
tired to their respective apartments. 

Emily was shown to hers by a nun of the 
convent, whom she was glad to diamss, for 
her heart was melancholy, and her attention 
so much abstracted, that conversation with a 
stranger was painful. 

She thought her father daily declining ; and 
attributed his present" fatigue more to the 
feeble state of his frame than to the difficulty 
of the journey. A train of gloomy ideas 
haunted her mind, till she fell asleep. 

In about two hours after, she was awakened 
by the chiming of a bell, and then heard 
quick steps pass along the gallery into which 
her chamber opened. She was so little accus- 
tomed to the manners of a convent, as to be 
alarmed by this circumstance : her fears ever 
alive for her father, suggested that he was 
very ill, and she arose in haste to go to hint?. 
Having paused, however, to let the persons 
in the gallery pass before she oi)ened her 
door, her thoughts in the mean time recovered 
from the confusion of sleep, and she tmder- 
stood that the bell was the call of the monks 
to prayers. 

It had now ceased ; and all being again 
still, she forbore to go to St Aubert's room. 
Her mind was not disposed for immediate 
sleep, and the moon-light, that shone into 
her chamber, invited her to open the case- 
ment, and look out upon the country. 

It was a still and beautiful night — the sky 
vras wivobscwxed by any cloud, and scarce a 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



QfT 



leaf of the woods beneath trembled in the 
air. 

As she listened, the midnight hymn of the 
monks rose softly from a chapel that stood on 
one of the lower cliffs, — a holy strain that 
seemed to ascend through the silence of night 
to heaven ; and her thoughts ascended with 
it. 

From the consideration of His works, her 
mind rose to the adoration of the Deity, in 
His goodness and power : wherever she turned 
her view, whether on the sleeping earth, or to 
the vast regions of space glowing with worlds 
beyond the reach of human thought, the sub- 
limity of God and the majesty of His pre- 
sence appeared. 

Her eyes were filled with tears of awful 
love and admiration ; and she felt that pure 
devotion, superior to all the distinctions of 
human systems, which lifts the soul above 
this world, and seems to expand it into a 
nobler nature — such devotion as can, perhaps, 
only be experienced when the mind, rescued 
for a moment from the humbleness of earthly 
considerations, aspires to contemplate His 
power in the sublimity of His works, and His 
goodness in the infinity of His blessings. 

* Is it not now the hour. 

The holy hour, when, to the cloudless height 
Of yon starr'd concave, climbs the full-orb^ moon. 
And to this nether world, in solemn stillness, 
Gives sign, that, to the listening ear of Heaven, 
Religion's voice should plead ? The very babe 
Knows this, and, 'chance awaked, his little hands 
Lifts to the gods, and on his innocent couch 
Calls down a blessing.' 

Caractacus. 

The midnight chant of the monks soon 
after dropped into silence ; but Emily re- 
mained at the casement watching the setting 
moon, and the valley sinking into deep shade, 
and willing to prolong her present state of 
mind. At length she retired to her mattress, 
and sunk into tranquil slumber. 



CHAPTER V. 

• While in the rosy vale 

Love breathed his infant sighs, from anguish free.' 

Thomson. 

St. Aubert, sufficiently restored by a night's 
repose to pursue his journey, set out in the 
morning, with his family and Valancoiut for 
Rousillon, which he hoped to reach before 
night-fall. The scenes through which they 
now passed were as wild and romantic as any 
they had yet observed ; with this difference, 
that beauty, every now and then, softened the 
landscape into smiles. 

Little woody recesses appeared among the 
mountains, covered with bright verdure and 
flowers ; or a pastoral valley opened its grassy 
bosom in the shade of the difiis, with flocks 



and herds loitering along the banks of a 
riviilet that refreshed it with perpetual green. 

St. Aubert could not repent the &ving 
taken this fatiguing road, though he was this 
day, also, frequently obliged to alight, to walk 
along the rugged precipice, and to climb the 
steep and flinty mountain. The wonderful 
sublimity and variety of the prospects repaid 
hinti for all this ; and the enthusiasm with 
which they were viewed by his young com- 
panions, heightened his own, and av^akened 
a remembrance of all the delightful emotions 
of his early days, when the subhme charms of 
nature were first unveiled to him. He found 
great pleastu^e in conversing with Valancourt, 
and in listening to his ingenious remarks : the 
fire and simphcity of his manners seemed to 
render him a characteristic figure in the scenes 
aroimd them ; and St. Aubert discovered in 
his sentiments the justness and the dignity 
of an elevated mind imbiassed by intercourse 
with the world. 

He perceived that his opinions were formed, 
rather than imbibed — ^were more the result of 
thought, than cJf learning : of the >yorUl he 
seemed to know nothing, for he believed well 
of all mankind ; and this opinion gave him 
the reflected image of his own heart. 

St. Aubert, as he sometimes lingered to 
examine the wild plants in his padi, often 
looked forward with pleasure to Emily and 
Valancourt as they strolled on together — he 
with a countenance of animated delight point- 
ing to her attention some grand feaiure of the 
scene ; and she listening and observing with a 
look of tender seriousness that spoke the ele- 
vation of her mind. They appeared like two 
lovers who had never strayed beyond these 
their native mountains ; whose situation had 
secluded them from the frivolities of common 
hfe ; whose ideas were simple and grand, like 
the landscapes among which they moved ; and 
who knew no other happiness than in the 
union of pure and affectionate hearts. St 
Aubert smiled, and sighed at the romantic 
picture of felicity his fancy drew, and sighed 
again to think that natiu-e and simplicity were 
so little known to the world, as that their plea- 
sures were thought romantic. 

* The world,' said he, pursuing this train of 
thought, ' ridicules a passion which it seldom 
feels : its scenes, and its interests distract the 
mind, deprave the taste, corrupt the heart ; 
and love cannot exist in a heart that has lost 
the meek dignity of innocence. Virtue and 
taste are nearly the same ; for virtue is little 
more than active taste ; and the most delicate 
affections of each combine in real love. How 
then are we to look for love in great cides, 
where selfishness, dissipation, and insincerity 
supply the place of tenderness, siniplicity, and 
truth ? 

It was near noon, when the travellers, 
having arrived at a piece of steep and danger- 
ous road, aUgYiXedi Xo \i3»JL. 'Wv^XQs^Hi^'^ei. 



S8 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



up an ascent that was clothed with wood, and 
instead of following the carriage, they entered 
the refreshing shade. A dewy coolness was 
diffused upon the air, which, with the bright 
verdure of turf that grew under the trees, the 
mingled fragrance of flowers and of balm, 
thyme, and lavender that enriched it, and the 
grandeur of the pines, beech, and chestnuts 
that overshadowed them rendered this a most 
delicious retreat. Sometimes the thick foliage 
excluded all view of the country ; at others, it 
admitted some partial catches of the distant 
scenery which gave hints to the imagination 
to picture landscapes more interesting, more 
impressive than any that had been presented 
to the eye. The wanderers often lingered to 
indulge in these reveries of fancy. 

The pauses of silence, such as had for- 
merly interrupted the conversations of Valan- 
court and Emily, were more frequent to-day 
than ever. Valancourt often dropped sud- 
denly from the most animating vivacity into 
fits of deep musing ; and there was sometimes 
an imaffected melancholy in his smile, which 
EmHy could not avoid understanding, for 
her heart was interested in the sentiment it 
spoke. 

St. Aubert was refreshed by the shades, and 
they continued to saunter under them, follow- 
ing as nearly as they could guess the direction 
of the road till they perceived that they had 
totally lost it. They had continued near the 
brow of the precipice, allured by the scenery 
it exhibited, while the road wound far away 
over the cliff above. Valancourt called loudly 
to Michael, but heard no voice, except his 
echoing among the rocks, and his various 
efforts to regain the road were equally unsuc- 
cessful. While they were thus circumstanced, 
they perceived a shepherd's cabin between the 
boles of the trees at some distance, and Va- 
lancourt bounded on first to ask assistance. 
When he reached it, he saw only two little 
children at play on the turf before the door. 
He looked into the hut, but no person was 
there ; and the eldest of the boys told him 
that their father was with his flocks, and their 
mother was gone down into the vale, but 
would be back presently. As he stood con- 
sidering what was further to be done, on a 
sudden he heard Michael's voice roaring forth 
most manfully among the cliffs above, till he 
made their echoes ring. Valancourt imme- 
diately answered the call, and endeavoured to 
make his way through the thicket that clothed 
the steeps, following the direction of the sound. 
After much struggle over brambles and pre- 
cipices, he reached Michael, and at length 
prevailed with him to be silent, and to hsten 
to him. The road was at a considerable dis- 
tance from the spot where St. Aubert and 
Emily were ; the carriage could not easily 
return to the entrance of the wood ; and since 
it would he very fatiguing for St. Aubert to 
climh the long and steep road to the pbjca 



where it now stood, Valancourt was anxious 
to find a more easy ascent by the way he had 
himself passed. 

Meanwhile St. Aubert and Emily approached 
the cottage, and rested themselves on a rustic 
bench fastened betweentwo pines which over- 
shadowed it, till Valancourt, whose steps they 
had observed, should return. 

The eldest of the children desisted from his 
play, and stood still to observe the strangers, 
while the younger continued his little gambols, 
and teased his brother to join in them. St. 
Aubert looked with pleasure upon this picture 
of infantine simplicity till it brought to his 
remembrance his own boys, whom he had 
lost about the age of these, and their lamented 
mother ; and he simk into a thoughtfulness ; 
which Emily observing, she immediately began 
to sing one of those simple and lively airs he 
was so fond of, and which ^e knew how to 
give with the most captivating sweetness. St. 
Aubert smiled on her through his tears, took 
her hand and pressed it affectionately, and 
then tried to dissipate the melancholy reflec- 
tions that lingered in his mind. 

While she sung, Valancourt approached, 
who was unwilling to interrupt her, and paused 
at a little distance to listen. When she had 
concluded, he joined the party, and told them 
that he had foimd Michael* as well as a way 
by which he thought they could ascend the 
cliff to the carriage. He pointed to the woody 
steeps above, which St Aubert surveyed with 
an anxious eye. He was already wearied by 
his walk, and this ascent was formidable to 
him. He thought, however, it would be less 
toilsome than the long and broken road, and 
he determined to attempt it ; but Emily, ever 
watchful of his ease, proposing that he should 
rest and dine before they proceeded further, 
Valancourt went to the carriage for the refresh- 
ments deposited there. 

On his return, he proposed removing a 
little higher up the mountain, to where the 
woods opened upon a grand and extensive 
prospect ; and thither they were prep)aring to 
go, when they saw a young woman join the 
children, and caress and weep over them. 

The travellers, interested by her distress, 
stopped to observe her. She took the youngest 
of the children in her arms, and, perceiving 
the strangers, hastily dried her tears and pro- 
ceeded to the cottage. St. Aubert, on inquir- 
ing the occasion of her sorrow, learned that 
her husband, who was a shepherd, and lived 
here in the summer months to watch over the 
flocks he led to feed upon these mountains, 
had lost on the preceding night his little alL 
A gang of gipsies, who had for some time in- 
fested the neighbourhood, had driven away 
several of his master's sheep. 'Jacques,' 
added the shepherd's wife, ' had saved a little 
money, and had bought a few sheep with it, 
and now they must go to his master for those 
\]|[iaildx& ^\.o\«a;i\ ^.xidwhat is worse than aU, 



THE MYSTERIES OF U DO LP HO. ^ 

his master, when he comes to know how it is, ment, could make no reply but by a smile of 
will trust him no longer with the care of his gratitude. 

flocks, for he is a hard man ; and then what They continued to wind under the woods, 
is to become of oiu* children ?' between the grassy knolls of the mountain, 

The innocent countenance of the woman, and as they reached the shady summit which 
and the simplicity of her manner in relating he had pointed out, the whole party burst 
her grievance, inclined St. Aubert to believe into an exclamation. Behind the spot where 
her story ; and Valancourt, convinced that it they stood, the rock rose perpendicularly in a 
was true, asked eagerly what was the value of massy wall to a considerable height, and then 
the stolen sheep ; on hearing which he tiurned branched out into overhanging crags. Their 
away with a look of disappointment. St. grey tints were well contrasted by the bright 
Aubert put some money into her hand ; Emily hues of the plants and wild flowers that grew 
too gave something from her little purse, and in their fractured sides, and were deepened by 
they walked towards the cliflF ; but Valancourt the gloom of the pines and cedars that waved 
lingered behind, and spoke to the shepherd's above. The steeps below, over which the eye 
wife, who was now weeping with gratitude passed abruptly to the valley, were fringed with 
and surprise. He inquired how much money thickets of alpine shrubs ; and lower still ap- 
was yet wanting to replace the stolen sheep, pear«d the tufted tops of the chestnut woods 
and found that it was a sum very little short of that clothed their base — among which peeped 
all he had about him. He was perplexed and forth the shepherd's cottage just left by the 
distressed. travellers, with its bluish smoke curling high 

•This sum, then,' said he to himself, in the air. On every side appeared the majes- 

• would make this poor family completely tic summits of the Pyrenees ; some exhibiting 
happy — it is in my power to give it — to make tremendous crags of marble, whose appear- 
th^m completely happy ! But what is to be- ance was changing every instant as the varying 
come of me? — ^how shall I contrive to reach lights fell upon their surface; others, still 
home with the little money that will remain ?' higher, displaying only snowy points, while 

For a moment he stood, unwilling to forego their lower steeps were covered almost invari- 

the luxury of raising a family from ruin to ably with forests of pine, larch, and oak, that 

happiness, yet considering the difficulties of stretched down to the vale. This was one of 

pursuing his journey with so small a sum as the narrow valleys that open from the Pyrenees 

would be left. into the country of Rousillon, and whose 

While he was in this state of perplexity, the green pastures and cultivated beauty form a 

shepherd himself appeared : his children ran decided and wonderful contrast to the romantic 

to meet him ; he took one of them in his grandeur that environs it. Through a vista of 

arms, and, with the other clinging to his coat, the mountains appeared the . lowlands of 

came forward with a loitering step. His for- Rousillon, tinted with the blue haze of distance, 

lorn and melancholy look determined Valan- as they united with the waters of the Mediter- 

court at once ; he threw down aU the money ranean ; where, on a promontory which marked 

he had, except a very few louis, and bounded the boundary of the shore, stood a lonely 

away after St. Aubert and Emily, who were beacon, over which were seen circling flights 

groceeding slowly up the steep. Valancourt of sea-fowl. Beyond appeared now and th«i 

ad seldom felt his heart so hght as at this a stealing sail, white with the sun-beam, and 

moment ; his gay spirits danced with pleasure ; whose progress was perceivable by its approach 

every object around him appeared more in- to the light-house. Sometimes, too, was seen 

teresting or beautiful than before. St. Aubert a sail so distant, that it served only to mark 

observed the uncommon vivacity of his coun- the line of separation between the sky and the 

tenance : waves. 

' What has pleased you so much ?' said On the other side of the valley, immediately 

he. opposite to the spot where the travellers rested, 

' O what a lovely day !' replied Valancourt ; a rocky pass opened towards Gascony. Here 

• how brightly the sun shines I how pure is no sign of cultivation appeared. The rocks 
this air ! what enchanting scenery !' of granite that screened the glen rose abruptly 

• It is indeed enchanting,' said St. Aubert, from their base, and stretched their barren 

whom early experience had taught to imder- points to the clouds, unvaried with woods, 

stand the nature of Valancourt's present feel- and uncheered even by a hunter's cabin, 

ings. * What pity that the wealthy, who can Sometimes, indeed, a gigantic larch threw its 

command such sunshine, should ever pass long shade over the precipice, and here and 

their days in gloom— in the cold shade of there a cliff reared on its brow a monumental 

selfishness ! For you, my yoimg friend, may cross, to tell the traveller the fate of him who 

the sun always shine as brightly as at this had ventured thither before. This spot seemed 

moment 1 may your own conduct always give the very haunt of banditti ; and Emily, as 

you the sunshine of benevolence and reason sheJooked down upon it, almost expected to 

united !' see them stealing out from some hoVlcsw '»c4'i. 

Valancourt, highly flattered by this compli- to look iox \3aRai ^i^. ^Qivx ^\st ^\x ^>?k^ 



30 



THE MYSTRRJES OF UDOLPHO, 



not less terrific struck her — a gibbet, standing 
on a point of rock near the entrance of the 
pass, and immediately over one of the crosses 
she had before observed. These were hiero- 
gl3rphics that told a plain and dreadful story. 
She forbore to point it out to St. Aubert ; but 
it threw a gloom over her spirits, and made 
her anxious to hasten forward, that they 
might with certainty reach Rousillon before 
nightfall. It was ne«essary, however, that St. 
Aubert should take some refreshment ; and 
seating themselves on the short dry turf, they 
opened the basket of provisions, while 

* by breeay murmurs cool'd, 

Broad o'er tJuir heads the verdant cedars wave. 
And high palmetos lift their graceful shade. 

tfiey draw 

Ethereal soul, their drink reviving gales 
Profusely breathing from the piuey groves, 
And vales of fragrance ; there at distance hear 
The roaring floods and cataracts.' 

Thomson. 

St. Aubert was revived by rest, and by the 
serene air of this summit ; and Valancourt 
was so charmed with all around, and with the 
conversation of his companions, that he 
seemed to have forgotten he had any further 
to go. Having concluded their simple reixist, 
they gave a long farewell look to the scene, 
and again began to ascend. St. Aubert re- 
joiced when he reached the carriage, wliich 
Emily entered with him ; but Valancourt, 
willing to take a more extensive view of the 
enchanting country, into which they were 
about to descend, than he could do from a 
carriage, loosened his dogs, and once more 
bounded with them along the banks of the 
road. He often quitted it for points that 
promised a wider prospect ; and the slow 
pace at which the mules travelled, allowed 
him to overtake them with ease. Whenever 
a scene of uncommon magnificence appeared, 
he hastened to iniform St. Aubert, who, 
though he was too much tired to walk him- 
self, sometimes made the chaise wait, while 
Emily went to the neighbouring cliff. 

It was evening when they descended the 
lower Alps that bind Rousillon and form a 
majestic barrier round that charming country, 
leaving it open only on the east to the 
Mediterranean. The gay tints of cultivation 
once more beautified the landscape ; for the 
lowlands were coloured with the richest hues 
which a luxuriant climate and an industrious 
people can awaken into hfe. Groves of 
orange and lemon perfumed the air, their 
ripe fruit glowing among the foliage ; while, 
sloping to the plains, extensive vineyards 
spread their treasures. Beyond these, woods 
and pastures, and mingled towns and ham- 
lets, stretched towards the sea, on wliosc 
bright surface gleamed many a distant sail ; 
while over the whole scene was diffused the 
purple glow of evening. This landscape, with 
iJw siuTouDciing Alps, did indeed present a 



perfect picture of the lovely and the sublime — 
of ' beauty sleeping in the lap of horror.' 

The travellers, having reached the plains, 
proceeded between hedges of flowering myrtle 
and pomegranate to the town of Aries, where 
they proposed to rest for the night. They 
met with simple but neat accommodation, 
and would have passed a happy evening, 
after the toils and the delights of this day, had 
not the approaching separation thrown a 
gloom over their spirits. It was St. Aubert's 
plan to proceed on the morrow to the borders 
of the Mediterranean, and travel along its 
shores into Languedoc; and Valancourt, 
since he was now nearly recovered, and had 
no longer a pretence for continuing with his 
new friends, resolved to leave them here. St. 
Aubert, who was much pleased with him, in- 
vited him to go further, but did not repeat 
the invitation ; and Valancourt had resolution 
enough to forego the temptation of accepting 
it, that he might prove himself not unworthy 
of the favour. On the following morning, 
therefore, they were to part ; St. Aubert to 
pursue his way to Languedoc, and Valan- 
court to explore new scenes among the moun- 
tains, on his return home. During this 
exening he was often silent and thoughtful ; 
St. Aubert's manner towards him was affec- 
tionate, though grave ; and Emily was serious, 
though she made frequent efforts to appear 
cheerful. After one of the most melancholy 
evenings they had yet passed together, they 
separated for the night 



CHAPTER VL 

' I care not. Fortune 1 what you me deny ; 
You cannot rob me of fre% Nature's grace , 
You cannot shut the windows of the sky, 
Through which Aurora shows her brightemng 

face ; 
You cannot bar my constant feet to trace 
The woods and lawns, by living stream, at ere : 
Let health my nerves and finer fibres brace, 
And I their toys to the great children leave : 
Of fancy, reason, virtue, nought can me bereave.* 

Thomson. 

In the morning Valancourt breakfasted with 
St. Aubert and Emily, neither of whom 
seemed much refreshed by sleep. The 
languor of illness still hung over St. Aubert, 
and to Emily's fears his disorder appeared to 
be increasing fast upon him. She watched 
his looks with anxious affection, and their 
expression was always faithfully reflected in 
her own. 

At the commencement of their acquaint- 
ance, Valancourt had made known his name 
and family. St. Aubert was not a stranger to 
either ; for the family estates, which were 
now in the possession of an elder brother of 
VnKincourt, were little more, than twenty 
tmVt^s Oi\s>\.;m.\. iiQia La Vailed, and he bad 



TMM MYSTERIES OP UDOLPNO. ^t 

sometimes met the elder Valancourt on visits down his cheek, threw a smile upon his coun- 
in the neighbourhood. This knowledge had tenance, and said in a dieering voice, 
made him more willingly receive his present ' There is something in the ardour and in- 
companion ; for, though his countenance and genuousness of youth, which is particularly 
manners would have won him the acquaint- pleasing to the contemplation of an old man, 
ance of St. Aubert, who was very apt to if his feelings have not been entirely corroded 
trust to the intelligence of his own eyes with by the world. It is cheering and reviving, 
respect to countenances, he would not have like the view of spring to a sick person ; his 
accepted these as sufficient introductions to mind catches somew^t of the spirit of the 
that of his daughter. season, and his eyes are lighted up with the 

t The breakfast was almost as silent as the transient sunshine. Valancourt is this spring 
supper of the preceding night ; but their to me. ' 

musing was at length interrupted by the Emily, who pressed her father's hand 
sound of the carriage wheels which were to afif^tionately, had never before listened with 
bear away St. Aubert and Emily. Valan- so much pleasure to the praises he bestowed ; 
court started from his chair, and went to the no, not even when he had bestowed them on 
window ; it was indeed the carriage, and he herself. 

returned to his seat without speaking. The They travelled on, among vineyards, woods, 
moment was now come when they must part, and pastures, delighted with the romantic 
St. Aubert told Valancourt that he hoped he beauty of the landscape, which was bounded 
would never pass La Vallee without favour- on one side by the grandeur of the Pyrenees, 
ing him with a visit ; and Valancourt, eagerly and on the other by the ocean ; and soon 
thanking him, assured him that he never after noon they reached the town of Colioure, 
would ; as he said which he looked timidly at situated on the Mediterranean. Here they 
Emily, who tried to smile away the serious- dined, and rested till towards the cool of day, 
ness of her spirits. They passed a few when they pursued their way along the shores 
minutes in interesting conversation, and St. — those enchanting shores ! which extend to 
Aubert then led the way to the carriage, I-.anguedoc. 

Emily and Valancourt following in silence. Emily gazed with enthusiasm on the vast- 
The latter lingered at the door several ness of the sea, its surface varying as the 
minutes after they were seated, and none of lights and shadows fell, and on its woody 
the party seemed to have courage enough banks mellowed with autumnal tints. 
to say — Farewell ! At length St. Aubert St. Aubert was impatient to reach Perpig- 
pronounced the melancholy word, which nan, where he expected letters from M. 
Emily passed to Valancourt, who returned it Quesnel ; and it was the expectation of 
with a dejected smile, and the carriage drove these letters that had induced him to leave 
on. Coliom-e, for his feeble frame had required 

The travellers remained for some time in a immediate rest, 
state of tranquil pensiveness which is not un- After travelling a few miles, he fell asleep ; 
pleasing. and Emily, who had put two or three books 

St. Aubert interrupted it by observing : into the carriage on leaving La Vall^, had now 
• This is a very promising young man ; it is the leisure for looking into them. She sought 
many years since I have been so much pleased for one in which Valancourt had been reading 
with any person, on so short an acquaintance, the day before, and hoped for the pleasure 
He brings back to my memory the days of of retracing a page over which the eyes of a 
my youth, when every scene was new and beloved friend had lately passed, of dwelling 
delightful!' St. Aubert sighed, and sunk on the passages which he had admired, and of 
again into a reverie ; and as Emily looked permitting them to speak to her in the Ian- 
back upon the road they had passed, Valan- guage of his own mind, and to bring himself 
court was seen, at the door of the little inn, to her presence. On searching for the 
following them with his eyes. He perceived book she could find it no where, but in its 
her, and waved his hand ; and she returned stead pierceived a volume of Petrarch's poems, 
the adieu till the winding road shut her from that had belonged to Valancourt, whose name 
his sight. was written in it, and from which he had fre- 

* I remember when I was about his age, quently read passages to her with all the 
resumed St. Hubert ; and I thought and felt pathetic expression that characterized the 
exactly as he does. The world was opening feelings of the author. 
upon me then ; now— it is closing.' She hesitated in believing, what would have 

' My dear sir, do not think so gloomily, been sufficiently apparent to almost any other 
said Emily in a trembUng voice ; I hope you person, that he had purposely left^™s book 
have many, many years to live— for your own mstead of the one she had lost, and that love 
sake— for my sake. ' had prompted theexchange ; but havmg opened 

*Ah, my Emily! replied St. Aubert, for it with impatient pleasure, and observed the 
thy sake! Well— I hope it is so.' lines of his pencU drawn along the various 

He wiped away a tear that was stealing passages he had ie3A«\o>i^,^sA>a3i.^^^X!cfiiT^ 



THE MYSTERIES OP VDOLFHO. 



more descriptive of delicate tenderness than 
he had dared to trust his voice with, the con- 
viction came at length to her mind. 

For some moments she was conscious only 
of being beloved ; then, the recollection of all 
the variations of tone and countenance with 
which he had recited these sonnets, and of 
the soul which spoke in their expression, 
pressed to her memory, and she wept over the 
memorial of his affection. 

They arrived at Pcrpignan soon after sun- 
set, where, St Aubert found, as he had ex- 
pected, letters from M. Quesnel ; the contents 
of which so evidently and grievously affected 
him, that Emily was alarmed, and pressed 
him, as far as her delicacy would permit, to 
disclose the occasion of his concern : but he 
answered her only by tears, and immediately 
began to talk on other topics. 

Emily, though she forbore to press the one 
most interesting to her, was greatly affected 
by her father's manner, and passed a night 
of sleepless solicitude. 

In the morning they pursued their journey 
along the coast towards I-«ucate, another 
town on the Mediterranean, situated on the 
borders of Languedoc and Rousillon. 

On the way, Emily renewed the subject of 
the preceding night, and appeared so deeply 
aflTccted by St. Aubert's silence and dejection, 
that he relaxed from his reserve. 

' I was unwilling, my dear Emily,' said he, 
to throw a cloud over the pleasure you receive 
from these scenes, and meant, therefore, to 
conceal for the present some circumstances, 
with which, however, you must at length have 
been made acquainted. But your anxiety has 
defeated my purpose ; you suffer as much 
from this, perhaps, as you will do from a 
knowledge of the facts 1 have to relate. 

• M. Qucsncl's visit proved an unhappy one 
to me ; he came to tell me part of the news 
he has confirmed. You may have heard me 
mention a M. Motteville of Paris, but you 
did not know that the chief of my personal 
property was invested in his hands. 

' I had great confidence in him, and I am 
yet willing to believe that he is not wholly un- 
worthy of my esteem. A variety of circum- 
stances have concurred to ruin him, and — I 
am ruined with him. ' 

St. Aubert paused to cohceal his emotion. 

• The letters I have just received from M. 
Quesnel,' resumed he,' struggling to speak 
with firmness, ' inclosed others from Motte- 
ville, which confirmed all I dreaded.' 

' Musi we then quit La Vallee? ' said Emily, 
after a long pause of silence. 

' That is yet uncertain,' replied St. Aubert ; 
it will depend upon the compromise Motte- 
ville is able to make with liis creditors. My 
income, you know, was never large, and 
now it will be reduced to litlle indeed ! It is 
for you, Emily — for you my cliild, that I am 
most afflicted. ' His last words faUercd. 



Emily smiled tenderly upon him through 
her tears, and then, endeavouring to overcome 
her emotion, * 

' My dear father, said she, do not grieve for 
me or for yourself ; we may yet be happy ; 
— if La VaJIde remains for us, we must be 
happy. We will retain only one servant, and 
you shall scarcely perceive the change in your 
income. Be comforted, my dear sir ; we 
shall not feel the want of those luxuries which 
others value so highly, since we never had a 
taste for them ; and poverty cannot deprive 
us of many consolations ; it cannot rob us of 
the affection we have for each other, or de- 
grade us in our own opinion, or in that of any 
person whose opinion we ought to value. 

St. Aubert concealed his face with his 
handkerchief, and was unable to speak ; but 
Emily continued to urge to her father the 
truths which himsdf had impressed upon 
her mind. 

' Besides, my dear sir, poverty cannot de- 
prive us of intellectual delights. It cannot 
deprive you of the comfort of affording me 
examples of fortitude and benevolence, nor 
me of the delight of consoling a beloved 
parent. It cannot deaden our taste for the 
grand and the beautiful, nor deny us the 
means of indulging it ; for the scenes of 
nature — those sublime spectacles, so infinitely 
superior to all artificial luxuries ! are open for 
the enjoyment of the poor as well as of the 
rich. Of what, then, have we to complain, so 
long as we are not in want of necessaries? 
Pleasures, such as wealth cannot buy, will 
still be ours. We retain, then, the sublime 
luxuries of nature, and lose only the frivolous 
ones of art. 

St. Aubert could not reply ; he caught 
Emily to his bosom, their tears flowed to- 
gether ; but — they were not tears of sor- 
row. After this language of the heart, all 
other would have been feeble, and they re- 
mained silent for some time. Then St. Aubert 
conversed as before ; for, if his mind had not 
recovered its natural tranquillity, it at least 
assumed the appecu^nce of it. 

They reached the romantic town of Lencate 
early in the day ; but St. Aubert was weary, 
and they determined to pass the night there. 
In the evening he exerted himself so far as to 
walk with his daughter to view the environs, 
that overlook the lake of Lcucate, the Medi- 
terranean, part of Rousillon, with the 
Pyrenees, and a wide extent of the luxuriant 
province of Languedoc, now blushing witl\ 
the ripened vintage which the peasants wen? 
beginning to gather. St. Aubert and Emily 
saw the busy groups, caught the joyous song 
that was wafted on the breeze, and anticipated 
with apparent pleasure their next day's 
journey over this gay region. He designed, 
however, still to wind along the sea-shore. 
To return home immediately was partly hiij 
wish \ hut Uom this he was withheld by a 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



$» 



desire to lengthen the pleasure which the breeze now came from the shore, and Emily 
journey gave his daughter, and to try the let down the gUss ; but the air which was re- 
effect of the sea air on his own disorder. freshing to health, was as chilling to sickness. 
On the following day, therefore, they re- and St. Aubert desired that the window might 
commenced their journey through Langue- be drawn up. Increasing illness made hhn 
doc, winding the shores of the Mediter- now more anxious than ever to finish the day's 
ranean ; the Pyrenees still forming the journey, and he stopped the muleteer to 
magnificent back-ground of their prospects, inquire how far they had yet to go to the next 
while on their right was the ocean, and on post, 
their left, wide extended plains melting into He replied, ' Nine miles.' 
the blue horizon. St. Aubert was pleased, 'I feel I am unable to proceed mudi 
and conversed much with Emily ; yet his further/ said St. Aubert ; ' inquire, as you go, 
cheerfulness was sometimes artificial, and if there is any house on the road that woukl 
sometimes a shade of melancholy would steal accommodate us for the night' 
upon his countenance and betray him. This He sunk back in the carriage, and Michael, 
was soon chased away by Emily's smile ; who cracking his whip in the air, set off, and con- 
smiled, however with an aching heart, for tinned on the full gallop, till St. Aubert, 
she saw that his misfortunes preyed upon his almost fainting, called to him to stop. Emily 
mind and upon his enfeebled frame. ♦ looked anxiously from the window, and saw a 
It was evening when they reached a small peasant walking at some little distance on the 
village of Upper Languedoc, where they road, for whom they waited till he came up, 
meant to pass the night, but the place could when he was asked if there was any house in 
not afford them beds ; for here, too, it was the neighbourhood that acconmiodated tra- 
the time of the vintage ; and they were vellers. 

obliged to proceed to the next post. The He replied, that he knew of none. * There 
languor of illness and of fatigue, which re- is a chateau, indeed, among those woods on 
turned upon St. Aubert, required immediate the right,' added he, 'but I believe it receives 
repose, and the evening was now far ad- nobody, and I cannot show you the way, for 
vanced ; but from necessity there was no I am almost a stranger here.' 
appeal, and he ordered Michael to proceed. St. Aubert was going to ask him some 

The rich plains of Languedoc, which ex- further question concerning the chateau, but 
hibited all the glories of the vintage, with the the man abruptly passed on. After some 
gaieties of a French festival, no longer consideration, he ordered Michael to proceed 
awakened St. Aubert to pleasure, whose con- slowly to the woods. Every moment now 
dition formed a mournful contrast to the deepened the twilight and increased the diffi- 
hilarity and youthful beauty which sur- culty of finding the road. Another peasant 
rounded him. As his languid eyes moved soon "after passed. 

over the scene, he considered that they would ' Which is the way to the chateau in the 
soon, perhaps, be closed for ever on this woods ?' cried Michael, 
world. * The chateau in the woods !* eKdaimed the 

'Those distant and sublime mountains,' peasant — ' Do you mean that with the turret 
said he secretly, as he gazed on a chain of the yonder?' 

Pyrenees that stretched towards the west, ' I don't know as for the turret, as you call 
•these luxuriant plains, this blue vault, the it,' said Michael, 'I mean that white piece of 
cheerful light pf day, will be shut from my a building that we see at a distance there, 
eyes I The song of the peasant, the cheering among the trees.' 

voice of man — will no longer sound for me !' ' Yes, that is the turret ; why, who are you. 
The intelligent eyes of Emily seemed to that you are going thither?' said the man 
read what passed in the mind of her father, with surprise. 

and she fixed them on his face with an ex- St. Aubert, on hearing this odd question, 
pression of such tender pity as recalled his and observing the pec^ar tone in which it 
thoughts from every desultory object of re- was delivered, looked out from the carriage, 
gret, and he remembered only that he must ' We are travellers,' said he, ' who are in 
leave his daughter without protection. This search of a hbusfe of accommodation for the 
reflection changed regret to agony ; he sighed night ; is there any hereabout. ' 
deeply, and remained silent, while she seemed ' None, Monsieur, unless you have a mind 
to understand that sigh, for she pressed his to try yoiu*luck yonder,' replied the peasant, 
hand ^ectionately, and then turned to the pointing to the woods ; ' but I would not 
window to conceal her tears. The sun now^ advise you to go there.' 
threw a last yellow gleam on the waves of the • To whom does the chateau belong ?' 
Mediterranean, and the gloom of twilight 'I scarcely know myself. Monsieur.' 
spread fast over the scene, till only a melan- ' It is uninhabited, then ?' 
choly ray appeared on the western horizon, ' No, not uninhabited ; the steward and 
marking the point where the sun had set amid housekeeper are there, I believe.' 
tiie vapours of an autumnal evening. A cool On hearing tbis, ^X. ^nJq^X ^^Nssrassas^ \» 



84 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



Eroceed to the chateau, and risk the refusal of was heard from among the trees on the left, 

eing accommodated for the night : he there- It was not the voice of command or distress ; 

fore desired the countr3rman would show but a deep hc^ow tone, which seemed to be 

Michael the way, and bade him expect reward scarcely human. The man whipped his mules 

for his trouble. The man was for a moment till they went as fast as possible, regardless of 

silent, and then said that he was going on the darkness, the broken ground, and the 

other business, but that the road coiUd not be necks of the whole party ; nor once stopped 

missed, if they went up an avenue to the till he reached the gatewhicb opened from the 



right, to which he pointed. St. Aubert was 
going to speak, but the peasant wished him 
good-night, and walked on. 

The carriage now moved towards the 
avenue, which was guarded by a gate ; and 



avenue into the high road, where he went into 
a more moderate pace. 

' I am very ill.' said St. Aubert, taking his 
daughter's hand. 

' You are worse, then, sir l' said Emily, ex- 



Michael having dismounted to open it, they tremely alarmed by his manner ; * you arc 

Altered between rows of ancient onk and worse, and here is no assistance 1 Good God! 

chestnut, whose intermingled branches formed what is to be done ?' 

a lofty arch above. There was something so He leaned his head on her shoulder, while 

gloomy and desolate in the appearance of this she endeavoured to support him with her 

avenue and its lonely silence, that Emily arm ; «nd Michael was i^ain ordered to stop, 

almost shuddered as she passed along ; and When the rattling of the wheels had ceased, 

recollecting the manner in which the peasant music was heard on the air : it was to Emily 

had mentioned the chateau, she gave a mys- the voice of Hope. 

terious meaning to his words, such as she had ' Oh I we are near some human habitation J' 

not suspected when he uttered them. These said she : ' help may soon be had.' 

apprehensions, however, she tried to check. She listened anxiously; the sounds werc 

considering that they were probably the cifect distant, and seemed to come from a remote 

of a mekmcholy imagination, which her part of the woods that bordered the road ; 

father's situation, and a consideration of her and as she looked towards the spot whence 

own circumstances, had made sensible to they issued, she perceived in Uie raint moonr 

every impression. light something like a chateau. It was diffi- 

They passed slowly on, for they were now cult, however, to reach this. St. Aubert was 

almost in darkness, which, together with the now too ill to bear the motion of the carriage; 

unevenness of the ground, and the frequent Michael could not quit his mules ; and Enuly, 

roots of old trees that shot up above the soil, who still supported her father, feared to leave 

made it necessary to proceed with caution, him, and also feared to venture alone to such 

On a sudden Michael stopped the carriage ; a distance, she knew not whither, or to whom, 

and as St. Aubert looked from the window to Something, however, it was necessary to deter- 



in quire the cause, he perceived a figure at 
some distance moving up the avenue. The 
dusk would not permit him to distinguish 
what it was, but he bade Michael go on. 

'This seems a wild place,' said Michael ; 
• there is no house hereabout ; don't your 
honour think we had better turn back?' 

' Go a little further, and if we see no house 
then, we will return to 
Aubert. 



mme upon immediately : St. Aubert, there- 
fore, told Michael to proceed slowly ; but they 
had not gone far, when he fainted, and the 
carriage was again stopped. He lay quite 
senseless. 

' My dear, dear father !' cried Emily in great 
agony, who began to fear that he was dying ; 
' speak, if it is only one word, to let me hear 
the road,' replied St. the sound of your voice I' 

But no voice spoke in reply. In an agony 
Michael proceeded with reluctance ; and of terror she bade Michael bring water from 
the extreme slowness of his pace made St. the rivulet that flowed along the road ; and 
Aubert look again from the window to hasten having received some in the man's bat, with 
him, when again he saw the same figure. He trembling hands she sprinkled it over her 
was somewhat startled ; probably the gloomi- father's face, which, as the moon's rays now 
ness of the spot made him more liable to fell upon it, seemed to bear the impression of 



alarm than usual. However this might be, 
he now stopped Michael, and bade him call 
to the person in the avenue. 

• Please your honour, he may be a robber,' 
said Michael. 



death. Every emotion of selfish fear now 
gave way to a stronger influence ; and com- 
mitting St. Aubert to the care of Michael, 
who refused to go far from his mules, she 
stepped from the carriage in search of the 



• It does not please me,' replied St. Aubert, chateau she had seen at a distance. U was a 

who could not forbear smiling at the simplicity still moonlight night, and the music, which 

9f"'s phrase; 'and we will therefore return to yet sounded on the air, directed her steps 

the road for I see no probability of meeting from the high road up a shadowy lane that 

^^/JhSi'T ""^ T 1^^-'. . ^^^ ^° *^*^ ^'oo^s- Her mind was for some 

^icflaej^ turned about immediately, and was time so entirely occupied by anxiety and teiTor 

Tetmcmg his way with alacrity, when a voice ioi Vi^it father, that she felt none for herself, 



THE MYSTEHIES OP UDOLPHO. 35 

till the deepening gloom of the overhanging Emily, who seemed to move on the wind, as 
foliage, which now wholly excluded the moon- fast as they could towards the road, 
light, and the wildncss of the place, recalled When she reached the carriage she found 
her to a sense of her adventurous situation. St. Aubert restwed to animation. On the 
The music had ceased, and she had no guide recovery of his senses, having heard from 
but chance. For a moment she paused in Michael whither his daughter was gone, anxiety 
terrified perplexity ; till a sense of her father's for her overcame every regard for himself, 
condition again overcoming every consideration and he had sent him in search of her. He 
for herself, she proceeded. The lane termi- was, however, still lanc[uid ; and perceiving 
nated in the woods ; but she looked round in himself unable to travel much further, he re- 
vain for a house or a human being, and as newed his inquiries for an inn, and concerning 
vainly listened for a sound to guide her. She the chateau in the woods, 
hurried on, however, not knowing whither, ' The chateau cannot accommodate you, 
avoiding the recesses of the woods, and en- sir,' said a venerable peasant who had followed 
deavouring to keep along their margin, till a Emily from the wocxls ; ' it is scarcely inha- 
rude kind of avenue, w-hich opened upon a bited ; but if you wiU do me the honour to 
moonlight spot, arrested her attention. The visit my cottage, you shall be welcome to the 
wildness of this avenue brought to her recol- best bed it affords. ' ■ 

lection the one leading to the turreted^hateau, St. Aubert was himself a Frenchman, he 
and she was inclined to believe that this was a therefore was not surprised at French courtesy ; 
part of the same domain, and probably led to but ill as he was, he felt the value of the ofiK^ 
the same point. While she hesitated whether enhanced by the manner which accompanied 
to follow it or not, a sound of many voices in it. He had too muph delicacy to apologize, 
loud merriment burst upon her ear ; it seemed or to appear to hesitate about availing himself 
not the laugh of cheerfulness but of riot j and of the peasant's hospitality ; but immediately 
she stood appalled. While she paused, she accepted it, with the same frankness witn 
heard a distant voice calling from the way which it was offered. 

she had come, and not doubting but it was The carriage again moved slowly on ; 
that of Michael, her first impulse was to Michael following the peasants up the lane 
hasten back ; but a second thought changed which Emily had just quitted, till they came 
her purpose — she believed that nothing to the moon-light glade. St. Aubert's spirits 
less than the last extremity could have were so far restored by the courtesy of his 
prevailed with Michael to quit his mules ; host and the near prospect of repose, that he 
and fearing that her father was now dying, looked with a sweet complacency upon the 
she rushed forward, with a feeble hope of moonlight scene, surrounded by the shadowy 
obtaining assistance from the people in the woods, through which, here and there, an 
woods. opening admitted the streaming splendour, 

Her heart beat with fearful expectation discovering a cottage or a sparkling rivulet, 
as she drew near the spot whence the He listened, with no painful emotion, to the 
voices issued, and she often startled when her merry notes of the guitar and tambourine ; and 
steps disturbed the fallen leaves. The sounds though tears came to his eyes when he saw 
led her towards the moonlight glade she had the debonnaire dance of the peasants, they 
before noticed ; at a little distance from which were not merely tears of mournful regret, 
she stopped, and saw between the boles of With Emily it was otherwise : immediate 
the trees a small circular level of green turf, terror for her father had now subsided into a 
surrounded by the woods, on which appeared gende melancholy, which every note of joy, 
a group of figures. On drawing nearer, she by awakening comparison, SCTved to heighten, 
distinguished these, by their dress, to be pea- The dance ceased on the approach of the 
sants, and perceived several cottages scattered carriage, which was a phenomenon in these 
found the edge of the woods, which waved sequestered woods, and the peasantry flocked 
loftily over this spot. While she gazed, and round it with eager curiosity. On learning 
endeavoufed to overcome the apprehensions that it brought a sick stranger, several girls 
that withheld her steps, several peasant girls ran across the tiirf, and returned with wine 
came out of a cottage ; music instantly struck and baskets of grapes, which they presented 
up and the dance began. It was the joyous ' to the travellers — each with kind coiitention 
music of the vintage — the same she- had before pressing for a preference, 
heard upon the air. Her heart, occupied with At length the carriage stopped at a neat 
terror for her father, could not feel the con- cottage ; and his venerable conductor having 
trast which this gay scene offered to her own assisted St. Aubert to alight, led him and 
distress. She stepped hastily forwards to- Emily to a small inner room, illumined only 
wards si group cf elder persons who were by moon-beuns which the open easement 
seated at the door of a cottage, and, having admitted. St. Aubert, rejoicing in rest, seated 
explained her situation, entreated their assist- himself in an arm-chair, and his senses were 
jmce. Several of them rose with alacrity, and, refreshed by the cool and balmy air tha.t li-^v^ 
offering any service in their power, followed waved the tm\)QiH<i^tv^% \tfsas^'a>oj;2s^s&'» «Sig^ 



36 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



Wafted their sweet brenth into the apartment. 
His host, who was called Ijpl Voisin, quitted 
the room, but soon returned with fruits, cream, 
and all the pastoral luxury his cottage af- 
forded ; having set down which with a smile 
df unfeigned welcome, he retired behind the 
chair of his guest. - St. Aubert insisted on his 
taking a seat at the table ; and when the fruit 
had allayed the fever of his palate, and he 
found himself somewhat revived, he began to 
converse with his host ; who communicated 
several particulars concerning himself and his 
famfly, which were interesting because they 
were spoken from the heart, and delineated a 
picture of the sweet courtesies of family kind- 
ness. Emily sat by her father holding his 
hand ; and while she listened to the old man, 
her heart swelled with the affectionate sym- 
pathy he described, and her tears fell to the 
mournful consideration that death would 
probably soon deprive her of the dearest 
blessing she then possessed. The soft moon- 
light of an autumnal evening, and the distant 
music which now sounded a plaintive strain, 
aided the melancholy of her niind. The old 
man continued to talk of his ifamily, and St. 
Aubert remained silent. 

• I have only one daughter living,' said La 
Voisin, ' but she is happily married, and is 
everything to me. When 1 lost my wife,' he 
added with a sigh, ' I came to live with Agnes 
and her family : she has several children, who 
are all dancing on the green yonder, as merry 
as grasshoppers — and long may they be so ! I 
hope to die among them. Monsieur. I am 
old now, and cannot expect to live long : but 
there is some comfort in dying surrounded by 
one's children.' 

• My good friend,' said St. Aubert, while 
his voice trembled, ' I hope you will long live 
surrounded by them. ' 

' Ah, sir ! at my age I must not expect 
that !' replied the old man, and he paused : 
* I can scarcely wish it,' he resumed ; ' for I 
trust that whenever I die I shall go to heaven, 
where my poor wife is gone before me : I can 
sometimes almost fancy I sec her, of a still 
moonlight night, walking among these shades 
she loved so well. Do you believe, Monsieur, 
that we shall be permitted to revisit the earth 
after we have quitted the body ?' 

Emily could no longer stifle the anguish of 
her heart ; her tears fell fast upon herVather's 
hand, which she yet held. He made an 
effort to speak, and at length said in a low 
voice : 

• I hope we shall be permitted to look down 
on those we have left on the earth ; but I can 
only hope it : futurity is much veiled from our 
eyes, and faith and hope are our only guides 
concerning it. We are not enjoined to believe 
that disembodied spirits watch over the friends 
they have loved, but we may innocently hope 
It. It is a hope which I will never resign,' 

continued be, while he wiped the tears irom 



his daughter's eyes : ' it will sweeten the bitter 
moments of death !' 

Tears fell slowly on his cheeks : La Voisin 
wept too ; and there was a pause of silence. 
Then La Voisin, renewing the subject, said : 

' But you believe, sir, that we shall meet in 
another world the relations we have loved in 
this ? I must believe this.' 

• Then do believe it,' readied St. Aubert ; 
' severe, indeed, would be die pangs of sepa- 
ration, if we believed it to be eternal. Look 
up, my dear Emily, we shall meet again V He 
lifted his eyes towards heaven, and a gleam of 
moonlight, which fell upon his countenance, 
discovered peace and resignation stealing on 
the lines of sorrow. 

La Voisin felt that he had pursued the sub- 
ject too far, and he dropped it saying, ' We 
are in darkness, I forgot to bring a light.' 

' No,' said St. Aubert, 'this is a light I 
love ; sit down, my good friend. Exniiy, my 
love, I And myself letter than I have been all 
day : this air refreshes me. I can enjoy this 
tranquil hour, and that music which floats so 
sweetly at a distance. Let me see you smile. 
Who touches that guitar so tastefully? Are 
there two instruments, ot is it an echo I 
hear?' 

It is an echo, Monsieur, I fancy. That 
guitar is often heard at night, when all is ^till, 
but nobody knows who touches it ; and it is 
sometimes accompanied by a voice so sweet 
and so sad, that one would almost think the 
woods were haunted.' 

'They certainly are haunted,' said St. 
Aubert with a smile ; ' but I believe it is by 
mortals.' 

'I have sometimes heard it at midnight, 
when I could not sleep,' rejoined La Voisin, 
not seeming to notice this remark, 'ahnost 
under my window ; and I never heard any 
music like it : it has often made me think <x 
my poor wife till I cried. I have sometimes 
got up to the window, to look if I coidd see 
anybody ; but as soon as I opened the case- 
ment, all was hushed, and nobody to be seen ; 
and I have listened and listened, till I have 
been so timorous that even the trembling of 
the leaves in the breeze has made me starL 
They say it often comes to warn people of 
their death ; but I have heard it these many 
years, and outlived the warning.' • , 

Emily, though she smiled at the mention of 
this ridiculous superstition, could not, in the 
present tone of her spirits, wholly resist its 
contagion. 

'Well, but my good friend,' said St. 
Aubert, ' has nobody had courage to follow 
the sounds ? If they had, they would probably 
have discovered who is the musician.' 

' Yes, sir, they have followed them some 
way into the woods ; but the mtuic has stUl 
retreated, and seemed as distant as ever ; and 
the people have at last been afraid of beinf 
\cOi voXQ baxm, and would go no further. It 



THE MYSTMHIMS OF VDOLPHO. 



37 



is very seldom that I have heard these sounds 
so early in the evening ; they usually come 
about midnight, when that bright planet, which 
is rising above the turret yonder, sets below 
the woods on the left. ' 

•What turret?' asked St. Aiibert, with 
quickness, ' I see none. ' 

' Your pardon, monsieur, you do see one 
indeed, for the moon shines full upon it — 
up the avenue yonder, a long way off : 
the chateau it belongs to is hid among the 
trees. ' 

'Yes, my dear sir,' said Emily, pointing ; 
* don't you see something glitter above the dark 
woods ? It is a vane, I fancy, which the rays 
fall upon.' 

' O yes ; I see what you mean. And whom 
does the chateau belong to ? ' 

'The Marquis dfe Villeroi was it^ owner,' 
replied La Voisin emphatically. 

'Ah!' said St. Aubert, with a deep sigh, 
'are we then so near Le-Blanc?' He ap- 
peared much agitated, 

' It used to be the Marquis's favourite resi- 
dence,* resumed La Voisin ; ' but he took a 
dislike to the place, and has not been there 
for many years. We have heard lately that 
he is dead, and that it is fallen into other 
hands.' 

St. Aubert, who had sat in deep musing, 
was roused by tlie last words. ' Dead ! ' he 
exclaimed : ' Good God ! when did he die ? ' 

* He is reported to have died about five 
weeks since,' repUed La Voisin. ' Did you 
know the Marquis, sir ? ' 

• This is very extraordinary 1 ' said St. 
Aubert, without attending to the question. 

' WTiy is it so, my dear sir ? ' said Emily, in 
a voice of timid curiosity. 

He made no reply, but sunk again into a 
reverie ; and in a few moments, when he 
seemed to have recovered himself, asked who 
had succeeded to the estates. 

' I have forgot his title, monsieur,' said La 
Voisin ; ' but my lord resides at Paris chiefly ; 
I hear no talk of his coming hither. ' 

' The chateau is shut up then still ? ' 

* Why, little better, sir ; the old housekeeper 
and her husband the steward have the care of 
it, but they live generally in a cottage hard 
by.' 

' The chategiu is spacious, I suppose? ' said 
Emily, 'and must be desolate for the resi- 
dence of only two persons. ' 

' Desolate enough, mademoiselle,' replied 
La Voisin : ' I would not pass one night in 
the chateau for the value of the whole domain.' 

iWhat is that?' said St. Aubert, roused 
again from thoughtfulness. As his host re- 
peated his last sentence, a groan escaped 
from St. Aubert, and then, as if anxious to 
prevent it from being noticed, he hastily 
asked La Voisin how long he had lived in 
this neighbourhood. ' Almost from my child* 
hood, sir/ replied his host. 



• You remember the late Marchioness, 
then ? ' said St. Aubert in an altered voice. 

' Ah, monsieur ! — that I do well. Ther« 
are many beside me who remember her. ' 

' Yes,' said St. Aubert — 'and I am one of 
those. ' 

' Alas, sir I you remember then a most 
beautiful and excellent lady. She deserved a 
better fate.' 

Tears stood in St. Aubert's eyes. — • Enough,' 
said he, in a voice almost stifled by the vio- 
lence of his «motions — 'it is enough, my 
friend.' 

Emily, though extremely surprised by her 
father's manner, forbore to express her feel- 
ings by any question. 

La Voisin began to apologize, but St. 
Aubert interrupted him : ' Apology is quite 
unnecessary,' said he; 'let us change the 
topic. You were speaiking of the music we 
just now heard.' 

' I was, monsieur — but hark ! it comes 
again ; listen to that voice 1' They were all 
silent : 

' At last a soft and solemn-breathing sound 
Rose, like a stream of rich distilled perfumes. 
And stole upon the air ; that even Silence 
Was took ere she was 'ware, and wish'd she might 
Deny her nature, and be never more 
Still, to be so displaced.' 

Milton. 

In a few moments the voice died into air, 
and the instrument which had been heard 
before, sounded in low symphony. 

St. Aubert now observed that it produced a 
tone much more full and melodious than that 
of a guitar, and still more melancholy and 
soft than the lute. 

They continued to listen, but the sounds re- 
turned no more. 

' This is strange ! ' said St. Aubert, at 
length interrupting the silence. 

' Very strange ! ' said Emily. 

* It is so,' rejoined La Voisin : and they 
were again silent. 

After a long pause, ' It is now about eighteen 
years since I first heard that music,' said La 
Voisin ; ' I remember it was on a fine sum- 
mer's night, much like this, but later, that I 
was walking in the woods, and alone. I re- 
member, too that my spirits were very low, 
for one of my boys was ill, and we feared we 
should lose him. I had been watching at his 
bedside all the evening, while his mother slept ; 
for she had sat up with him the night before. 
I had been watching, and went out for a little 
fresh air : the day had been very sultry. As 
I walked under the shades, and mused, Ir 
heard music at a distance, and thought it was 
Claude playing upon his flute, as he often did 
of a fine evening, at the cottage door. But 
when I came to a place where the trees opened, 
(I shall never forget it I ) and stood looking 
up at the north-lights, which shot up the 
heaven to a gc^t bs^jaX, V \«iw^ ^S^ ^ ^ 



33 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



sudden such sounds ! — they came so as I can- 
not describe. It was like tnc music of angels ; 
and I looked up again, almost expecting to 
see them in the sky. When I came home, I 
told what I had heard ; but they laughed at 
me, and said it must be some of the shep- 
herds playing on their pipes, and I could not 
persuade them to the contrary. A few nights 
after, however, my wife herself heard the same 
sounds, and was as much surprised as I was ; 
and Father Denis frightened her sadly, by 
saying that it was music come to warn her of 
her child's death, and that music often came 
to houses where there was a dying person.' 

Emily, on hearing this, shrunk with a 
superstitious dread entirely new to her, and 
could scarcely conceal her agitation from St. 
Aubert. 

' But the boy lived, Monsieur, in spite of 
Father Denis.' 

' Father Denis !' said St. Aubert, who had 
listened to " narrative old age" with patient 
attentipn — ' Are we near a convent, then ?' 

' Yes, sir ; the convent of St. Clair stands 
at no great distance — on the sea shore 
yonder.' 

' Ah !' said St. Aubert, as if struck with 
some sudden remembrance. ' The convent 
of St. Clair !' 

Emily observed the clouds of grief, mingled 
with a faint expression of horror, gathering 
on his brow ; his countenance became fixed, 
and, touched as it now was by the silver 
whitenesss of the moonlight, he resembled 
one of those marble statues of a monument, 
which seem to bend in hopeless sorrow over 
the ashes of the dead, shown 

* . _ by the blunted light 

That the dim moon through painted casements lends. ' 

The Emigrants. 

' But, my dear sir,' said Emily, anxious to 
dissipate his thoughts, ' you forget that repose 
is necessary to you. If our kind host will 
give me leave, I will prepare your bed, for I 
know how you like it to be made.' 

St. Aubert, recollecting himself, and smil- 
ing affectionately, desired she would not add 
to her fatigue by that attention ; and La 
Voisin, whose consideration for his guest had 
been suspended by the interests which his 
own narrative had recalled, now started from 
his seat, and apologising for not having 
called Agnes from the green, hurried out of 
the room. 

In a few moments he returned with his 
daughter, a young woman of pleasing coun- 
tenance, and Emily learned from her, what 
she had not before suspected — that, for their 
accommodation, it was necessary part of La 
Vosin's family should leave their beds. She 
lamented this circumstance, but Agnes, by 
her reply, fully proved that she inherited at 
least a share of her father's courteous hos- 
pitaUtyi, Jt was settled that some of hct 



children and Michael should sleep in the 
neighbouring cottage. 

' If I am better to-morrow, my dear,' said 
St. Aubert, when Emily returned to him, ' I 
mean to set out at an early hour, that we may 
rest during the heat of the day, and will travel 
towards home. In the |»esent state of my 
health and spirits I cannot look on a longer 
journey with pleasure, and I am also very 
anxious to reach La Vaillde.' 

Emily, though she also desired to retom, was 
grieved at her father's sudden wish to do so, 
which she thought indicated a greater degree 
of indisposition than he would admowledge. 

St Aubert now retired to rest, and Emily to 
her little chamber, but not to inunediate repose ; 
her thoughts returned to the late conversation 
concerning the state of departed spirits — a sub- 
ject at this time particularly affecting to her, 
when she had every reason to believe that her 
dear father would ere long be numbered with 
them. She leaned pensively on the little open 
casement, and in deep thought fixed her eyes 
on the heaven, whose blue, unclouded con- 
cave was studded thick with stars, the worlds 
perhaps of spirits, unsphered of mortal mould. 
As her eyes wandered along the boundless 
ether her thoughts rose, as beifore towards the 
sublimity of the Deity, and to the contem pla^ 
tion of futiuity. No busy note of this wdBa 
interrupted the course of her mind ; the merry 
dance had ceased, and every cottager had re- 
tired to his home. The still air seemed 
scarcely to breathe upon the woods, and now 
and then the distant sound of a solitary sheep 
bell, or of a closing casement, was all that 
broke on silence. At length even this hint of 
human being was heard no more. Elevated 
and enwrapt, while her eyes were often wet 
with tears of sublime devotion and solemn 
awe, she continued at the casement till the 
gloom of midnight hung over the earth, and 
the planet which La Voisin had pointed out 
sunk below the woods. She then recollected 
what he had said concerning this planet and 
the mysterious music, and as she lingered at 
the window, half hoping and half fearing that 
it would return, her mind was led to the re- 
membrance of the extreme emotion her ^ther 
had shown on mention of the Marquis La 
Villeroi's death, and of the fate of the mar- 
chioness, and she felt strongly interested con- 
cerning the remote cause of this emotion. 
Her surprise and curiosity were indeed the 
greater, because she did not recollect ever 
to have heard him mention the name of 
Villeroi. 

No music, however, stole on the silence of 
the night, and Emily, perceiving the lateness 
of the hour, returned to a scene of fatigue, 
remembered that she was to rise eariy in the 
morning, and withdrew from the window to 
repose. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



39 



CHAPTER VII. 

' L«t those deplore their doom. 

Whose hope still grovels in this dark sojourn; 
But lofty souls can look beyond the tomb. 
Can smile at fate, and wonder how they mourn. 
Shall Spring to these sad scenes no more return ? 

Is yonaer wave the sun's eternal bed ? 

Soon shall the orient with new lustre bum, 
And Spring shall soon her vital influence shed, 
Again attune the grove, again adorn the mead T 

Bbattib. 

Emily, called, as she had requested, at an 
early hour, awoke little refreshed by sleep, for 
uneasy dreams had pursued her, and marred 
the kindest blessing of the unhappy. But 
when she opened her casement, looked out 
upon the woods, bright with the morning sim, 
and inspired the pure air, her mind was 
soothed. The scenp was filled with that 
cheering freshness which seem to breathe the 
very spirit of health, and she heard only sweet 
and //V/«r^j^«tf sounds, if such an expression 
may be allowed — the matin-bell of a distant . 
convent, the faint murmur of the sea waves, 
the song of birds, and the far-oflf low of cattle 
whidh she saw coming slowly on between 
the trtmks of the trees. Struck with the cir- 
cumstances of imagery around her, she in- 
dulged the pensive tranquillity which they 
inspired ; and while she leaned on her window, 
waiting till St. Aubert should descend to break- 
fast, her ideas arranged themselves in the fol- 
lowing lines : 

THE FIRST HOUR OF MORNING. 

How sweet to wind the forest's tangled shade, 
When eariy twilight, from the eastern bound. 

Dawns on the sleeping landscape in the glade, 
And fades as Morning spreads her blush around ! 

When every infant flower, that wept in night. 
Lifts its chill head, soft glowing with a tear, 

Expands its tender blossom to the light. 
And gives its incense to the genial air. 

How fresh the breeze that wafts the rich perdime, 
And swells the melody of waking birds I 

The hum of bees, beneath the verdant gloom ! 
And woodman's song I and low of distant herds I 

Then, doubtful gleams the mountains hoary head. 
Seen through the parting foliage from afar, 

And, further still; the ocean's misty bed, 
With flitting sails, that partial sunbeams share. 

"But vain the silvan shade, the breath of May, 
The voice of music floating on the gale, 
And forms that beam through Morning's dewy veil, 

If health no longer bid the heart be gay i 

O balmy hour ! 'tis thine" her wealth to give ; 
Here spread her blush, and bid the parent live ! 

Emily now heard persons moving below in 
the cottage, and presently the voice of Michael, 
who was talking to his mules as he led them 
forth from a hut adjoining. As she left the 
room, St. Aubert, who was now risen, met 
her at the door, apparently as little restored 
by sleep as herself. She led him downstairs 



to the Uttle parlour in which they had supped 
on the preceding night, where they found 
a neat breakfast set out, while the host and 
his daughter waited to bid them good- 
morrow. 

• I envy you this cottage, my good friends,' 
said St. Aubert as he met them ; ' it is so 
pleasant, so quiet, and so neat ; and this air 
that one breathes — ^if anything could restore 
lost health, it would surely be this air.' 

La Voisin bowed gratefully, and replied, 
with the gallantry of a Frenchman, 'Our 
cottage may be envied, sir, since you and 
mademoiselle have honoured it with your 
presence.' 

St. Aubert' gave him a friendly smile for 
his compliment, and sat down to a table 
spread with cream, fruit, new cheese, butter, 
and coffee. Emily, who had observed her 
father with attention, and thought he looked 
very ill, endeavoured to persuade him to defer 
travelling till the afternoon ; but he seemed 
very anxious to be at home, and his anxiety he 
expressed repeatedly and with an earnestness 
that was unusual with him. He now said he 
found himself as well as he had been of late, 
and that he could bear travelling better in the 
cool hour of the morning than at any other 
time. But while he was talking with his vener- 
able host, and thanking him for his kind atten- 
tions, Emily observed his countenance change, 
and before she could reach him he fdl back in 
his chair. In a few moments he recovered from 
the sudden faintness that had come over him ; 
but felt so ill that he perceived himself imable 
to set out ; and having remained a little while, 
struggling against the pressure of indisposi- 
tion, he begged he might be helped upstairs 
to bed. This request renewed all the terror 
which Emily had suftered on the preceding 
evening ; but, though scarcely able to support 
herself under the sudden shock it gave ner, 
she tried to conceal her apprehensions from 
St. Aubert, and gave her trembling arm to 
assist him to the door of his chamb^. 

When he was once more in bed, he de- 
sired that Emily, who was then weeping in 
her own room, might be called ; and as she 
came, he waved his hand for every other per- 
son to quit the apartment. When they were 
alone, he held out his hand to her, and fixed 
his eyes upon her countenance, with an ex- 
pression so full of tenderness and grief, that 
all her fortitude forsook her, and she burst 
into an agony of tears. St. Aubert seemed 
struggling to acquire firmness, but was still 
unable to speak ; he could only press her 
hand, and check the tears that stood trembling 
in his eyes. At length he commanded his 
voice. 

• My dear child,' said he, trying to smile 
through his anguish, • my dear Emily !' and 
paused again. He raised his eyes to heaven, 
as if in prayer, and then, in a firmer tQnft^ 
and with a look \tv ^V\Oa ^'5. \^TA^rc«!s. ^"^ 



40 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHG. 



the father vras dignified by the pious solemnity 
of the saint, he said, ' My dear child, I would 
soften the painful truth I have to tell you, but 
I find myself quite unequal to the art. Alas I 
I would at this moment conceal it from you, 
but that it would be most cruel to deceive you. 
It cannot be long before we must part ; let us 
talk of it, that our thoughts and our prayers 
majr prepare us to bear it. His voice faltered, 
while Emily, still weeping, pressed his hand 
close to her heart, which swelled with a con- 
vulsive sigh ; but she could not look up. 

' Let me not waste these moments,' said St. 
Aubert, recovering himself ; ' I have much to 
say. There is a circumstance of solemn con- 
sequence which I have to mention, and a 
solemn promise to obtain from you ; when 
this is done I shall be easier. You have ob- 
served, my dear, how anxious I am to reach 
home, but know not all my reasons for this. 
Listen to what I am going to say. Yet stay, 
before I say more, give me this promise, a 
promise made to your dying father !' 

St. Aubert was interrupted. Emily, struck 
by his last words, as if for the first time, with 
a conviction of his immediate danger, raised 
her head : her tears stopped ; and, gazing at 
him for a moment with an expression of un- 
utterable anguish, a slight convulsion seized 
her, and she sunk senseless in her chair. St. 
Aubcrt's cries brought La Voisin and .his 
daughter to the room, and they administered 
every means in their power to restore her, but, 
for a considerable time without effect. When 
she recovered, St. Aubert was so exhausted by 
the scene he had witnessed, that it was many 
minutes before he had strength to speak ; he 
was, however, somewhat revived by a cordial 
which family gave him ; and being again 
alone with her, he exerted himself to tran- 
quillise her spirits, and to offer her all the 
comfort of which her situation udmittcd. She 
threw herself into his arms, wept on his neck ; 
and grief made her so insensible to all he 
said, that he ceased to offer the alleviations 
which he himself could not, at this moment, 
feel, and mingled his silent tears with hers. 
Recalled at length to a sense of duty, she 
tried to spare her father from further view of 
her suflfering ; and quitting his embrace, dried 
her tears, and said something which she 
meant for consolation. 

• My dear Emily,' replied St. Aubert, *my 
dear child, we must look up with humble con- 
fidence to that Being, who has protected ^nd 
comforted us in every danger and in every 
affliction we have known ; to whose eye every 
moment of our lives has been exposed ; He 
will not. He does not, forsake us now ; I feel 
' His consolations in my heart. I shall leave 
you, my child, still in His care ; and though I 
depart from this world, I shall still be in His 
presence. Nay. weep not again, my Emily. In 
death there is nothing new or siiri)rising, 
Sinc^ WQ all know tto we are bgru tg dvQ\ 



and nothing terrible to those who can con- 
fide in an all-powerful God. Had my life 
been spared now, after a very few years, in 
the course of nature, I must have resigned it : 
old age, with all its train of infirmity, its pri- 
vations and its sorrows, would have b^n 
mine ; and then, at last, death would have 
come, and called forth the tears you now 
shed. Rather, my child, rejoice that I am 
saved from such suffering, and that I am per- 
mitted to die with a mind unimpared, and 
sensible of the comforts of faith and of resig- 
nation. ' 

St. Aubert paused, fatigued vdth speaking. 
Emily again endeavoured to assume an air of 
composure ; and, in replying to what he had 
said, tried to soothe him with the belief that 
he had not spoken in vain. 

When he had reposed a while he resumed 
the conversation. 

'Let me return,' said he, 'to a subject 
which is very near my heart. I said I had a 
solemn promise to receive from you ; let me 
receive it now, before I explain the chief cir- 
cumstance which it concerns ; there are others, 
of which your peace requires that you should 
rest in ignorance. Promise, then, that you 
will perform exactly what I shall enjoin.' 

Emily, awed by the earnest solemnity of his 
manner, dried her tears, that had b^^n again 
to flow in spite of her efforts to suppress them, 
and, looking eloquently at St. Aubert, bound 
herself to do whatever he should require, by 
a vow, at which she shuddered, yet luiew not 
why. 

He proceeded : 

' I know you too well, my Emily, to bdieve 
that you would break any promise, much less 
one thus solemnly given ; your assurance 
gives me peace, and the observance of it is of 
the utmost importance to your tranquillity. 
Hear, then, what I am going to tell you. 
The closet which adjoins my chamber at La 
Vallde, has a sliding board in the floor : you 
will know it by a remarkable knot in the 
wood, and by its being the next board, except 
one, to the wainscot which fronts the door. 
At the dist;ince of about a yard from that end, 
nearer the window, you will perceive a line 
across it, as if the plank had been joined. 
The way to open it is this : press your foot 
upon the line ; the end of the board will then 
sink, and you may slide it with ease beneath 
the other. Below, you will see a hollow place. ' 
St. Aubert paused for breath, and Emily sat 
fixed in deep attention. ' Do you understand 
these directions, my dear?' said he. Emily, 
tliough scarcely able to speak, assured him 
that she did. 

* When you return home, then,' he added 
with a deep sigh — 

At the mention of her return home, all the 
melancholy circumstances that must attend 
this return rushed upon her fancy ; she burst 
mxo couvvilsive grief ; and St. Aubert himself, 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 4I 

affected beyond the resistance of the fortitude ready to attend St. Aubert Emily would not 

which he had at first summoned, wept with her. suffer her father to be disturbed, but desired 

After some moments he composed himself, that the priest might not leave the cottage. 
'My dear child,' said he, 'be comforted. When St. Aubert awoke from this doze, 

When I am gone, you will not be forsaken — his senses were confused, and it was some 

I leave you only in the more immediate care moments before he recovered them sufficiently 

of that providence which has never yet for- to know that it was Emily who sat beside him. 
saken me. Do not afflict me with this excess He then moved his lips, and stretched forth 

of grief ; rather teach me by your example to his hand to her ; as she received which, she 

bear my own.' He stopped again ; and Emily, sunk back in her chair, overcome by the im- 

the more she endeavoured to restrain her emo- pressiom of death on his countenance. In a 

tion, found it the less possible to do so. few minutes he recovered his voice, and 

St. Aubert, who now spoke with pain, Emily then asked if he wished to see the con- 
resumed the subject. ' That closet, my dear, fessor : he replied that he did : and, when 
— ^when you return home, go to it ; and the holy father appeared, she withdrew, 
beneath the board I have described you will They remained alone together above half 
find a packet of written papers. Attend to an hour. When Emily was called in, she 
me now, for the promise you have given par- found St. Aubert -more agitated than when 
ticularly relates to what I shall direct. These she had left him, and she gazed with a slight 
papers you must bum — and, solemnly I com- degree of resentment at the friar, as the 
mandyou, without examining them.' cause of this; who, however, looked mildly 

Emily's surprise for a moment overcame her and mournfully at her, and turned away, 

grief, and she ventured to ask why this must be. St Aubert in a tremulous voice said he 

St. Aubert replied, th^t, if it had been right wished her to join in prayer with him, and 

for him to explain his reasons, her late pro- asked if La Voisin would do so too. The old 

mise would have been unnecessarily exacted, man and his daughter came : they both wept, 

• It is sufficient for you, my love, to have a and kneeled with Emily round the bed, while 

deep sense of the importance of observing me the holy father read in a solenm voice the 

in this instance.' service for the dying. St. Aubert lay with a 

St. Aubert proceeded : * Under that board serene countenance, and seemed to join 

y<fu will also find about two hundred louis- fervently in the devotion ; while tears often 

d'ors wrapped in a silk purse. Indeed, it was stole from beneath his closed ef e-lids, and 

to secure whatever money might be in the Emily's sobs more than once interrupted the 

chateau, that this secret place was contrived, service. 

at a time when the province was overrun by When it was concluded, and extreme 

troops of men who took advantage of the unction had been administered, the friar 

tumults and became plunderers. withdrew. St. Aubert then made a sign for 

* But I have yet another promise to receive La Voisin to come nearer. He gave him his 

from you, which is — that you will never, hand, and was for a moment silent. At 

whatever may be your future circumstances, length he said in a trembling voice, ' My good 

sell the chateau.' St. Aubert even enjoined friend, our acquaintance has been short, but 

her, whenever she might marry, to make it an long enough to give you an opportunity of 

article in the contract, that the chateau should showing me much kind attention. I cannot 

always be hers. doubt that you will extend this kindness to my 

He then gave her a more minute account of daughter when I am gone ; she will have 

his present circumstances than he had yet need of it. I entrust her to your care during 

done ; adding, ' The two hundred louis, with the few days she will remain here. I need 

what money you will now find in my purse, is say no more — ^you know the feelings of a 

all the ready money I have to leave you. I father, for you have children : mine Would 

have told you how I am circumstanced with be indeed severe, if I had less confidence 

M. Motteville at Paris. Ah, my child! I in you.' He paused. 

leave you poor — ^but not destitute,' he added. La Voisin assured him, and his tears bore 

after a long pause. testimony to his sincerity, that he would do 

Emily could make no reply to anything he all he could to soften her affliction, and that, 

now said, but kneeled at the bedside, with her if St. Aubert wished it, he would even attend 

face upon the quilt, weeping over the hands he her into Gascony — ^an offer so pleasing to St. 

held there. Aubert, that he had scarcely words to acknow- 

After this conversation the mind of St. ledge his sense of the old man's kindness, or 

Aubert appeared to be much more at ease : to tell him that he accepted it, — The scene 

but exhausted by the effort of speaking, he that followed between St. Aubert and Emily 

sunk into a Jcind of doze ; and Emily con- affected La Voisin so much that he quitted 

tinued to watch and weep beside him, till a the chamber, and she was again left alone 

gentle tap at the chamber-door roused her. with her father, whose spirits seemed fainting 

It was La Voisin, come to say that a confessor fast : but neither his se.ns^s t^o^ \iiS»N^\^:a ^^\. 

from the neighbouring convent was below, failed Vum; an^ aX mXesN^U^ "^ eas.^'ari^^ 



42 THE MYSTEHIES Oi" UDOLPHO. 



I ■'.;. of thes^ l-i-W atifu! Tr:'-ir.*r.'.= irj tc"lE:ng iisefnhwa — iivtBth bU the ah»*J3ict sentiment 
I. . rlaurVt'-r >.^ to her f.:vjre '_-:r.r:_^r.. Per- izi tbe 'srcrld. Swirimmt is a disgrace instead 
\.>]j\ Kt ce.'.r ! ii-f ■.:.o-r:.: ::.-.rt jurJy or m- c-f aa arnftment. unless it lead us to good 
\,r*:W:fi hirr; -'rlf rr.orc.- '.I«»*!y than h*.- c:d d?w, actlcss. The miser, who thinks himsetf re- 
'Al»ove :?::. mv dfr.r hfriiiy ' said be. *do frrr.oiue mereh- becmse he possesses vi-ealtfa, 
r.ol indulge in tf-t pr:':e c: f.ne feelir?. the c.nd i:. as mistakes the means of doing good 
roni?-r-i;c •rrror of ar^ii'^Vit ir.in'is. 'fh -:■=.• f ?r ih? aciaal accompMimmtof it, is not more 
^■Lo rer-'Jy 7y3sse£5 vr^)iVL>.V\y oTighi early !o liaTueabie iban the man of sentiment without 
Xaz tiTighi ih'it 31 :s a dir.reroua c-^.]::t, irJ-e i-irnic. Yon may have observed per- 
wli>,h ii cor/.: nu?Jly extra ',tir.;; the exce=5 of sens ^h'ho deilisht so modi in this sort of sen- 
rnii'rry or d':;;^!.: ' from ever)* surround-ng s:"b:"Iiiy to seniiment, which exdudes that to 
circum^'jince. And Lince, in our pas=afe the cij'.s cf any practical Tirtne, that they turn 
tLrou;fh this world, painful circumstrinces from the distressed, and. because their suffer- 
occur more frc'jTiently t?.?.n pleasing ones, ings are painfoi to be contemplated, do not 
and since our S'fn^e of evi! i?, I fear, more endeavour to ndiene them. How despicaMe 
- acute than our sense of good, we become the 15 that humanity whidi ean be contented to 
victims of our fr^eling-:, unless we can in some pity where it might assoage !' 
degrcf: comniand them. I know you will say 8t. Aubert, some time after, spoke of 
— for you are young:, my Emilv — I know you Madame Cheron, his sister. 
will biiy that }'ou are contented sometimes to ' I^t me infwm you of a drcomstanoe that 
suffer, ratJier than to give up your refined nearly affects your welfare,' he added. * We 
&en::e of !iappin';=s at others ; but when your have, you know, had little intercourse for 
mind has Ijccn long harassed by vicissitude, some \-ears, but as she is now jrour only female 
you will be content to rest, and you will then relation. I have thought it proper to consijgn 
iccovcr from your delusion : you will per- you to her care, as you will sec in my will, till 
crjivc that the phantom of happiness is ex- you are of age. and' to recommend you to her 
changed for the substance ; for happiness protection afterwards. She is not exactly the 
ari':>es in a state of peace, not of tumult : it is person to whom I would have conunitted my 
of a temperate and uniform nature, and can Emily ; but I had no alternative, and I be- 
no more exist in a heart that is continually lieve her to be, upon the whole, a good kind 
alive to minute circimistances, than in one that of woman. I need not recommend it to your 
is dead to feeling. You see, my dear, that prudence, my love, to endeavour to con- 
though I would guard you against the dangers ciliate her kindness — ^>-ou uHl do this for his 
of sensiliility, I am not an advocate for apathy, sake who has often wished to do so foryom^s. 
At your .'i;jo, I .should have said that is a vice Emily assiued him that whatever he re- 
more liairful than all the errors of sensibility, quested she would rdigiously perform to the 
and 1 siiy so still. I call it a vice, because it utmost of her ability. ' Alas 1' added she, in a 
Icnci.i to ]>ositivc evil. In this, however, it voice interrupted by sighs, ' that will soon be 
riocs no more than an ill-governed sensibility, all which remains for me. It will be almost 
whif;h, by such a rule, might also be called a my only consolation to fulfil your wishes.' 
Mce ; ])ut the evil of the former is of more St. Aubert looked up silently in her face, as 
/^cncnil consequence. — I have exhausted my- if he would have spoken ; but his spirit sunk 
.s -ir,' sriid Si. Aubert feebly, 'and have wearied a while, and his eyes became heavy and diiU. 
yoii, my JMuily ; but on a .subject so impor- She felt that look at her heart 
t:iiit to your future comfort, 1 am an.xious to ' My dear father 1' she exclaimed ; and then, 
be perfectly understood.' checking herself, pressed his hand closer and 

h.unly assured him that his advice was most hid her face with her handkerchief. Her tears 
precious to her, and that she would never for- were concealed, but SL AubeH heard her con- 
gct it, or cease from endeavouring to profit by vulsive sobs. His spirits returned. 
it. St. Aubert smiled affectionately and sor- • O, my child i' said he fidntly, 'let my con- 
rowfully upoii her. solation be yours. I die in peace ; for I know 

• I repeat,' said he, ' I would not leach you that I am about to return to the bosom of my 
to become insensible if I could. I would onlv I-'ather, who will still beg our Father when I 
warn you of the evils of susceptibility, and am gone. Always trust in Him, my love, and 
point out how you may avoid them. Beware, he will support you in these moments, as he 
my love, I conjure you, of that self-delusion supports me.' 

which has been fatal to the peace of so many Emily could only listen and weep, but the 
persons— ]jc-ware of priding yourself on the extreme composure of his manner, and the 
gracefulness of sensibility. If you yield to faith and hope he expressed, somewhat 
A i.LI'^"'^^' y?"^ happiness is lost for ever, soothed her anguish. Yet whenever she 

itenance, and 

ginning to prevail 

bent on her, 

t)mt")Z^ ''"";*' J';c virtue. Remember, loo. aivd vVvcit heavy lids pressing to a dose— there 
*imf one net of beneficence— one act oi rca\ vjasapaxv^ m \v« \x«crt., «M3si «& defied ex- 




THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 43 

pression, though it required filial virtue like mixture of doubt and awful astonisbment. 

hers to forbear the attempt. Her reason could scarcely overcome an invo- 

He desired once more to bless her. luntary and unaccountable expectation of see- 

' Where are you, my dear ?' said he, as be ing that beloved countenance still susceptible, 

stretched forth his hands. She continued to gaze wildly ; took up the 

Emily had turned to the window that he cold hand ; spoke — still gazed ; and then burst 

might not perceive her anguish ; she now into a transport <rf grief. La Voisin, hearing 

understood that his sight had failed him. her sobs, came into the room to lead her away ; 

When he had given her his blessing — and it but she heard nothing, and only begged that 

seemed to be the last effort of expiring life — he would leave her. 

he sunk back on his pillow. She kissed his Again alone, she indulged her tears ; and 

forehead — the damps of death had settled when the gloom of evening obscured the 

there — and, forgetting her fortitude for a chamber, and almost veiled from her eyes the 

moment, her tears mingled with them. St. object of her distress, she still hung over the 

Aubert lifted up his eyes ; the spirit of a father body ; till her spirits at length were exhausted, 

returned to them, but it quickly vanished, and and she became tranquil. La Voisin again 

he spoke no more. knocked at the door, and entreated that she 

St Aubert Ungered till about three o'clock would come to the common apartment. Be- 
in the aftenoon, and thus gradually sinking into fore she went she kissed the lips of St. Aubert, 
death, he expired without a struggle or a sigh. as she was wont to do when she bade him 

Emily was led from the chamber by La good-night. Again she kissed them. Her 

• Voisin and his daughter, who did what they heart felt as if it would break : a few tears of 

could to comfort her. The old man sat and agony started to her eyes — she looked up to 

wept with her. Agnes was mor e erron eously heaven— then at St. Aubert— and left the room. 

officiou St "2 i ^ t>^ Retired to her lonely cabin, her melancholy 

^.' '\vv^iL>^Mi M'-^'^*^^ 1 thoughts still hovered round the bodv of her 

^^y ' " ' • deceased parent ; and when she sunK into a 

r'TJADTT?© TV YinA of slumber, the images of her waking 

CHAt'iii.K IX. ^injj s^ii haunted her fancy. She thought 

'O'er him, whose doom thy virtues brieve, ^^^ ^^^ her father approaching her with a 
Atrial forms shall sit at eve, benign countenance : then, smiling mourn- 

And bend the pensive head.' ^ fully and pointing upwards, his hps moved ; 

Collins. but instead of words, she heard sweet music 
The monk who had before appeared, returned borne on the distant air, and presently saw his 
in the evening to offer consolation to Emily, features glow with the mild rapture of a supe- 
and brought a kind message from ^the lady rior being. The strain seemed to swell louder, 
abbess, inviting her to the convent. ' Emily, and she awoke. The vision was gone ; but 
though she did not accept the offer, returned music yet came to her ear in strains such as 
an answer expressive of her gratitude. The angels might breathe. She doubted, listened, 
holy conversation of the friar, whose mild raised herself in the bed, and again listened, 
benevolence of manners bore some resem- It was music and not an illusion of her ima- 
blance to those of St. Aubert, soothed the gination. After a solemn steady harmony, it 
violence of her grief, and lifted her heart to paused — then rose again in mournful sweet- 
the Being who, extending through all place ness, — and then died, in a cadence that seemed 
and all eternity, looks on the events of this to bear away the listening soul to heaven, 
little world as on the shadows of a moment. She instantly remembered the music of the 
and beholds equally, and in the same instant, preceding night, with the strange circum- 
the soul that has passed the gates of death stances rdatcd by La Voisin, and the affect- 
and that which still lingers in ti^ body. ing conversation it had led to concerning the 

'In the sight of God,' said Emily, 'my state of departed spirits. 
dear father now exists as truly as he yester- All that St. Aubert had said on that subject 
day existed to me. It is to me only that he now pressed upon her heart, and overwhelmed 
is dead — to God and to himself he yet lives !' it. What a change in a few hours I He, 
The good monk left her more tranquil than who then could only conjecture, was now made 
she had been since St. Aubert died ; and acquainted with truth — was himself become 
before she retired to her little cabin for the one of the departed 1 As she Ustened, she 
night, she trusted herself so far as to visit the was chilled with superstitious awe ; her tears 
corpse. Silent, and without weeping, she stopped ; and she rose, and went to the win- 
stood by its side. The features, placid and dow. All without was obscured in shade : but 
serene, told the nature of the last sensations Emily, turning her eyes from the massy dark- 
that had lingered in the now deserted frame, ness of the woods, whose waving outline 
For a moment she turned away, in horror of appeared on the horizon, saw, on the left, 
the stillness in which death had fixed that that effulgent planet wliich the old man had. 
countenance, never till now seen otherwise pointed out, seUiiv.^ w«t >Cns; ^^^^'b. ^w^ xvi.- 
thfin animated; then g^a^ed on it with a mem\>ered vi)tta\ ^"6 \flA «6i^ ^^as^^ 



44 



THE LtVSTEklES ^r UDOLPHO. 



fc..', t>-' '.'.'.'.Ivy.'. •.•.«!: 'Jc^r-JT-:.*. \r. 'j^vJiZ. '.s 
l;^ t ».•>-•.*.. •..'^t ^'/',^ j^rtn -il.y *' "ir :o 2 
yfj*A\*:r *:. .u .•.'.»:. fe.".': '-■'.•^ v^ ':lv-'^.#r v :,»:.•:►*: 
♦'?.«•/ '.-dr.'.«i 'J :.«: ov-C-.'/.v y,.''*rv*rnl*r: h*;r:ro.'a 

^A'l;, l^I'/*- ■ srf.'i *:.': v^-fi'lv \y:f^v.Jz fi:s:?r 
hfj'l \'A\lX-.r, I... t .'.':/ v/VrK-':*l i-ito i^ltxi^e. 
Mj«: ijMftfj' d. L Jl i.'.'ry .-'iVJ-rjci no more. 
*v/fju ith*:t *.:.': ol/ ,';■•■. 't'i i?.'; ;/-ir.';l irembllr.? 

l/'rl A«:*rM ifj': f.'*fi.7«r'! tOJ/-, of li'i*: V/O^yd?, ^-.r.d 
Jii III': iJTXt fr;Mii<:lJt M/jk \y:}.lti'i tK':m, Ci.llI-.-d 
tf j'li a »ii«-!:iii',*ioIy Jiw;, ^.!;'; r'-i;r«:'j one; mor-'i 
to hrr l^r'l, ;'ii'l :il lc-ii;ith for^jot for a while 
licr V/rrow'i in --J'T'Tp. 

On tl.': following niominji^ «•>.': was visited 
by a hi;t«*r of th*: cjnvMil, viho came with 
kind offi':'**-. and a s':c^nd invitation from the 
lady iilili'r .'> ; and ICniily, tfjoujjh she could 
not for.;ik'* ilur cottage while tlie remains of 
li<-r father vM-r'r in it, consented, however pain- 
ful ii\it h a vi'.ji nin ,1 U: in th': pr'--:i:nt Mate of 
iier spirits, to p;<y her rchi>ecl3 to tlie abbciis in 
th'" I'Vi-u'iUf^. 

AIjoui ati hour before sunset Ld Voisin 
showed her the way through the woods to 
the convent, which stood in a small bay of 
the M«Mliii:rr;in«Mn, crowned bv .a woody 
nniphithealrc ; iind l^tniiy, had she been less 
iiMliiippy, vv«iiiM hiivtr ndniirerl the extensive 
■•■a \U'W iliiil iippeart'd from the green slope 
ill Iron! (jf the <Mlifiee, and the rich shores, 
hung Willi woods and ])astures, that extended 
on t'ilhcr hand. Hut her thoughts were now 
oc(!U|)i('d by (me sad idea ; smd the features 
of iiatiirr were to her colourh^ss and without 
lorm. The bell for vespers struck as she 
]>assed the anrient gate of the convent, and 
seemed the funeral note for St. Aulwrt : — little 
incidents alleet n mind enervated by sorrow, 
lunily stru^.gled a^ininst the .sielvenm«; faint- 
nehs that came over her, and was led into the 
pre.M'nei' (»f the abbess, who rtWMved her with 
an air i»f maternal tenderness — an air of such 
gentle solieituile and ein^sideration as touched 
lier with an in-.tantaneou>4 gratitude; her 
evos were hllevl witli tears; and the words 
she wouKl ha\e *ijH>ken faltered on her lips. 
The ablH'ss led lier to a seat, and sat down 
Iv^ivle l»er ; stil! lh»Klini; her hand, and n\5:arvl- 
iui; her in silen^v. as Mmily dried her tears 
and allemplevl to speak. 

• l^o v\Mni\vx^\l. my daughter.' Si\id the 
abK's-i m a sooihing "voice ; 'do UvM sjvak 
vet : I know i\]\ \ou would <.iy. Your spiiiis 
imui bo -iootlu'vl. We ;vrc v:o:ni; to pra\ors : 
wills v^u at tenvl v»ur ever.i n^j son i\.v ? 1 : i n \.\>m- 
to;u»»lo. my ohiUl. to kx^k up in our aSliotions 
u^ .1 I'ather who >,v< and pities us. .ir.d who 
ch.iNions lu h^'i moroy.' 

b' m i l\ \ U\t L-N r\ ^s^s, ,\i ^^ J, j^; r^ ; »>. • - ^^ .u -.. . ^, ^ ^ 

'^W;.vi oi»;oi\»nN in:!«^lv\l \v:'.>. :'•.'■',•. 1 ..;' 

at»tH'.vx ^i.".\"vs» h^.;- ;^i %v^v-.^ w;;;.ou; i:::.— I'-I 

'ivf. .in J. u.t:o.\\l ovor her wii'- :. '..v'v o: 



crxL^-.-SLar* cc e ^zsribsjk angeL Emily, 
\>1.*=. bx zi/tZsHA Tranquil, vas enoauraged to 
•ya^ wT^-yn rsssrrv. and to mention the 
cjoci-re ii&r. trjaiA her nnwiZIing' to quit the 
c'.:'.j.re : -*'ilSz ih* abbes did not oppose 
^--.tn Lv a z.^'. : izi pnised the filial piety of 
':. :r cmtizx z=. z &t£ed a hope that she would 
psLzs a terx cat; zt the convent before she 
retimed to Li Values. 

* You m-.:5t sLjk^ yourself a little time to 
recover from yoor first shock, my daughter, 
before }-oa encounter a sea>nd; I wUl not 
effect to conceal from yon how much I know 
your heart must suffer on returning to the 
scfrne of your former happiness. Here you 
will have all that quiet, and sympathy, and 
religion can give to restore your spirits. But 
come,' added she, obser\'ing the tears swell in 
Emily's eyes, ' we will go to the chapel. ' 

Emily followed to the parlour, where the 
nuns were assembled ; to whom the abbess 
committed her, saying 'This is a daughter 
for whom I have much esteem ; be a sister to 
her. ' They passed on in a train to the chapel, 
where the solemn devotion with which the 
service was i^erformed elevated her mind, 
and brought to it the comforts of faith and 
resignation. 

Twilight came on before the abbess's kind- 
ness would suffer Emily to depart ; when she 
left the convent, with a heart much lighter 
than she had entered it, and was re-conducted 
by La Voison through the woods, the pensive 
gloom of which was in unison with the temper 
of her mind ; and she pursued the little void 
path in musing silence, till her guide suddenly 
stopped, looked round, and then struck out 
of the path into the high grass, saying he had 
mistaken the road. 

He now walked on quickly ; and Emily 
proceeding with difficulty over the obscured 
and uneven ground, was left at some distance, 
till her voice arrested him ; who seemed im- 
willing to stop, and still hurried on. 

' If you arc in doubt about the way/ said 
Emily,' 'had we not better inquire it at 
the chateau yonder, between di^ trees ? ' 

'No,' replied I^ Voisin; 'there is no 
occasion, ^\'hen we reach that brook, 
ma'am<;elle. — (you see the light upon ir.o 
water there, beyond the woods) — vi'hte we 
reach that brook, we shall be at home pre- 
sently : 1 don't know how I happened to 
ra:>:ake the path : I seldom come t^?* way 
alter sun-set. 

•it is solitary enough.* said Emily, *biit 
vou havo no Kir.d:;ti here?* 

"No. muamselle — ^no bandittL' 

•\Vh.u are ycu .ifraid of tfien, mr good 
frler.a ? — you are r..''c supt;rs:i'.:ous ? ' 

• Nv"*. r..^: sv.v-.rs;-.:j-.:i —Int. totellyocihe 
•.-".: :^ I.uiy. r.,lv-.:y liie* to go near the 



.1..;. >.>.?.% 



L-N \^'-:~\ is i: ir\t':i:«i.' said Eraiir, 






THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



45 



' Why, ma'amselle, it is scarcely inhabited ; 
for our lord the marquis, and the lord of all 
these fine woods too, is dead. He had not 
once been in it for these many years ; and his 
people who have the care of it, live in a cot- 
tage close by.* 

Emily now understood this to be the 
chateau which La Voisin had formerly pointed 
out as having belonged to the Marquis Villeroi, 
on the mention of which her father had been so 
much affected. 

'Ah ! it is a desolate place now,' continued 
La Voisin ; * and such a grand fine place as 
I remember it ! ' 

Emily inquired what had occasioned this 
lamentable change ; but the old man was 
silent : and Emily, whose interest was awakened 
by the fear he had expressed, and above all 
by a recollection of her father's agitation, re- 
peated ^e question, and added, ' If you are 
neither afraid of the inhabitants, my good 
friend, nor are superstitious, how happens it 
that you dread to pass that chateau in the 
dark?' 

' Perhaps, then, I am a little superstitious, 
ma'amselle ; and if you knew what I do, you 
might be so too. Strange things have hap- 
pened there. Monsieur, your good father, 
appeared to have known the late marchioness.' 

'Pray inform me what did happen,' said 
Emily with much emotion. 

•Alas! ma'amselle,' answered La Voisin, 
* inquire no further : it is not for me to lay open 
the domestic secrets of my lord.' 

Emily, siuprised by the old man's words 
and his manner of delivering them, forbore 
to repeat her question : a nearer interest, the 
remembrance of St. Aubert, occupied her 
thoughts ; and she was led to recollect the 
music she heard on the preceding night, 
. which she mentioned to La Voisin. 

'You was not alone, ma'amselle, in this,' 
he replied ; ' I heard it too ; but I have so 
often heard it, at the same hour, that I was 
scarcely surprised.' 

• You doubtless believe this music to have 
some connection with the chateau,' said Emil^ 
suddenly ; ' and are therefore supersti- 
tious ? ' 

' It may be so, ma'amselle ; but there are 
other circumstances belonging to that chateau 
which I remember, and sadly too ! ' 

A heavy sigh followed : but Emily's de- 
licacy restrained the curiosity these words 
revived, and she inquired no further. 

On reaching the cottage, all the violence of 
her grief returned : it seemed as if she had 
escaped its heavy pressure only while she was 
removed from the object of it. She passed 
immediately to the chamber where the remains 
of her father were laid, and yielded tp all the 
anguish of hopeless grief 

La Voisin at length persuaded her to leave 
the room, and she returned to her own ; 
>yhere, e:^austed by the sufferings of the day, 



she soon fell into deep sleep, and awoke con- 
siderably refreshed. 

When tlie dreadful hour arrived in which 
the remains of St. Aubert were to be taken 
from her for ever, she went alone to the 
chamber to look upon his countenance yet 
once again ; and La Voisin, who had waited 
patiently below stairs till her despair should 
subside, with the respect due to grief, forbore 
to interrupt the indulgence of it, till surprise 
at the length of her stay, and then apprehen- 
sion, overcame his delicacy, and he went to 
lead her from the chamber. 

Having tapped gently at the door without 
receiving an answer, he listened attentively ; 
but all was still — no sigh, no sob of anguish 
was heard. Yet more alarmed by this silence, 
he opened the door, and found Emily lying 
senseless across the foot of the bed, near 
which stood the coffin. 

His calls procured assistance, and she was 
carried to her room, where proper applications 
at length restored her. 

During her state of insensibility, La Voisin 
had given directions for the coffin to he closed, 
and he succeeded in persuading Emily to for- 
bear revisiting the chamber. 

She, indeed,, felt herself unequal to this, and 
also perceived the necessity of sparing her 
spirits, and collecting fortitude sufficient to 
bear her through the approaching scene. 

St. Aubert had given a particular injunction 
that his remains should be interred in the 
church of the convent of St. Clair, and, in 
mentioning the north chancel, near the 
ancient tomb of the Villerois, had pointed 
out the exact spot where he wished to be 
laid. 

The superior had granted this place for the 
interment ; and thither, therefore, the sad 
procession now moved ; which was met at the 
gates by the venerable priest, followed by a 
train of friars. 

Every person who heard the solemn chant 
of the anthem, and the peal of the organ, 
that struck up when the body entered the 
church, and saw also the feeble steps and the 
assumed tranquillity of Emily, gave her in- 
voluntary tears. She shed none ; but walked, 
her face partly shaded by a thin black veil, 
between two persons who supported her, pre- 
ceded by the abbess, and followed by nuns, 
whose plaintive voices mellowed the swelling 
harmony of the dirge. 

When the procession came to the grave, 
the music ceased. 

Emily drew the veil entirely over her face, 
and in a momentary pause between the anthem 
and the rest of the service, her sobs were 
distinctly audible. 

The holy father began the service : and 
Emily again commanded her feelings, till the 
coffin was let down, and she heard the earth 
rattle on its lid : then, as she shuddere,d^ «. 



46 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

support on the person who stood next to her. were circumstances so soothing to her mind 
In a few moments she recovered ; and when that they aUnost tempted her to leave a world 
she heard those affecting and sublime words — where she had lost ner dearest friends, and 
' His body is buried in peace, and his soul re- devote herself to the cloister ina spotrendeioed 
tumstohimthatgaveit' — her anguish softened sacred to her by contaming the tomb of St 
into tears. AuberL The pensive enthusiasm, too, so 

The abbess led her from the church into her natural to her temper, had spread a beautiful 
own parlour, and there administered all the illusion over the sanctified ret^1ement of a 
consolations that religion and genUe sympathy nun, that almost hid from her view the selfish- 
can give. Emily struggled against the pres- ness of its security. But the touches which a 
sure of grief ; but the abbess, observing her melancholy fancy, slightly tinctured with 
attentivdy, ordered a bed to be prepared, and superstition, gave to the monastic scene, 
recommended her to retire to repose. She began to fade as her spirits revived, and 
also kindly claimed her promise to remain a brought once more to her heart an image which 
few days at the convent ; and Emily, who had had only transiently been banished thence, 
no wish to return to the cottage, the scene of By this she was silently awakened to hope, and 
all her sufferings, had leisure, now tliat no comfort, and sweet affections ; visions of 
immediate care pressed upon her attention, to happiness gleamed faintly at a distance, and 
feel the indisposition which disabled her from though she knew them to be illusions, she 
immediately travelling. could not resolve to shut them out for ever. It 

Meanwhile the maternal kindness of the was the remembrance of Valancourt — of his 
abbess and the gentle attentions of the nuns, taste, his genius, and of the countenance 
did all that was possible towards soothing her wliich glowed with both — that perhaps alone 
spirits and restoring her health. But the latter determined her to return to the world. The 
was too deeply wounded, through the medium grandeur and sublimity of the scenes amidst 
of her mind, to be quickly revived. She which they had first met had fesdnated her 
lingered for some weeks at the convent under fancy, and had imx>erceptibly contributed to 
the influence of a slow fever, wishing to return render Valancourt more interesting ty seem« 
home, yet unable to %o thither — often even re- ing to communicate to him somewhat of their 
luctant to leave the spot where her father's own character. The esteem, too, which St 
relics were deposited, and sometimes soothing Aubert had repeatedly expressed for him 
herself with the consideration that, if she died sanctioned this kindness. But though his 
here, her remains would repose beside those countenance and manner had continually ex- 
of St. Aubert. pressed his admiration of her, he had not 

In the meanwhile she sent letters to Madame otherwise declared it ; and even the hope of 
Cheron and to the old housekeeper, infoniiing seeing him again was so distant that she was 
them of the sad event that had taken place, scarcely conscious of it — still less that it 
and of her own situation. From her aunt she influenced her conduct on this occasion. 
received an answer, abounding more in com- It was several days after the arrival of 
mon-place condolement tlian in traits of real Madame Chcron's scn'ant before Emily was 
sorrow, which assured her that a servant sufficiently recovered to undertake the 
should be sent to conduct her to La Vallce, journey to La Vallde. On the evening pie- 
for that her own time was so much occupied ceding her departure she went to the cottage 
by company, that she had no leisure to undo:- to take leave of La Voisin and his family, and 
lake so long a journey. to make them a return for their kindness. 

However Emily might prefer I a Vallce to The old man she found sitting on a bench at 
7'houlouse, she could not be insensible of the his door, between his daughter and his son-in- 
indecorous and unkind conduct of her aunt law, who was just returned from his daily 
in suffering her to return thither, where she labour, and who ^\•as playing upon a pipe that 
had no longer a relation to console and pro- intone resembled an oboe. A flask of wine 
tect her— a conduct which was the more stood beside the old man, and before him a 
culpable since St. Aubert had appointed small table with fruit and bread, round which 
Madame Cheron the guardian of his orphan stood several of his grandsons, fine rosy 
daughter. children, who were taWng their supper as 

Madame Cheron's servant made the attend- their mother distributed it. On the edge of 
ance of the good La Voisin unnecessary ; the little green that spread before the cottage 
and Emily, who fdt sensibly her obligations were catde and a few sheep reposing under 
to him for all his kind attention to her late the trees. The landscape \^-as toudhed with 
father, as well as to herself, was glad to spare the mellow light of the evening sun, whose 
him a long, and what, at his time of life, must long slanting beams played through a vista of 
have been a troublesome journey. the woods, and lighted up the distant turrets 

During her stay at the convent the peace of the chateau. She paused a mcwnent, 

and sanctity that reigned within, the tranquil before she emerged from the shade, to gaze 

beauty of the scenery witliout, and the deli- upon the linppy group before her — on the 

cate attentions of the abbess and the mms, covwviU^eivcY and ease of healthy age depio 



THE MVSTMRIES OP U DO LP HO, 



4^ 



tured on the coiintenance of La Voisin ; the 
maternal tenderness of Agnes as she looked 
upon her children ; and the innocency of in- 
fantine pleasure reflected in their smiles. 
Emily looked again at the venerable old man 
and at the cottage. The memory of her 
father rose with full force upon her mind, and 
she hastily stepped forward, afraid to trust 
herself with a longer pause. She took an 
affectionate and affecting leave of La Voisin 
and his family ; he seemed to lo\'e her as his 
daughter, and shed tears. Emily shed many. 
She avoided going into the cottage, since she 
knew it would revive emotions such as she 
could not now endure. 

One painful scene yet awaited her — ^for she 
determined to visit again her father's grave ; 
and that she might not be interrupted or ob- 
served in the indulgence of her melancholy 
tenderness, she deferred her visit till every in- 
habitant of the convent, except the nun who 
promised to bring her the key of the church, 
should be retired to rest. 

Emily remained in her chamber till she 
heard the convent bell strike twelve, when the 
nuti came, as she had appointed, with the 
key of a private door that opened into the 
church ; and they descended together the 
narrow winding staircase that led thither. 

The nun offered to accompany Emily to the 
grave, adding — ' It is melancholy to go alone 
at this hour ,° but the former, thanking her 
for the consideration, could not consent to 
have any witness of her sorrow ; and the sister 
having unlocked the door, gave her the lamp. 

' You win remember, sister,' said she, ' that 
in the east aisle, which you must pass, is a 
newly-opened grave ; hold the light to the 
ground, that you may not stumble o\'er the 
loose earth.' 

Emily, thanking her again, took the lamp, 
and, stepping into the church, sister Mariette 
departed. 

But Emily paused a inomcnt at the door : a 
sudden fear came over her, and she returned to 
the foot of the staircase, where, as she heard 
the steps of the nun ascending, and, while she 
held up the lamp, saw her black veil waving 
over the spiral balusters, she was tempted to 
call h6r back. While she hesitated, the 
veil disappeared ; and in the next moment, 
ashamed of her fears, she returned to the 
church. The cold air of the aisles chilled 
her' ; and their deep silence and extent, feebly 
slione upon by the moon-light that streamed 
through a Gothic window, would at any other 
time nave awed her into superstition ; now 
grief occupied all her attention. She scarcely 
heard the whispering echoes of her own steps, 
or thought of the open grave till she found 
herself almost on its brinJc. A friar of the 
convent had been buried there on the pre- 
ceding evening, and, as she had sat alone in 
her chamber at twilight, she heard, at a dis- 
tance, the monks chanting the requiem for his 



soul. This brought freshly to her memory 
the circumstances of her father's deatib ; and - 
as the voices, mingling with a low querulous 
peal of the organ, swelled faintly, gloomy and 
affecting visions had arisen upon her mind. 
Now she remembered them ; and turning 
aside to avoid the broken ground, these 
recollections made her pass on with quicker 
steps to the grave of St. Aubert ; when, in the 
moon-light that fell athwart a remote part of 
the aisle, she thought she saw a shadow 
gliding between the pillars. She stepped to 
listen ; and not hearing any footstep, believed 
that her fancy had deceived her, and, no 
longer apprehensive of being observed, pro- 
ceeded. St. Aubert was biuied beneath a 
plain marble, bearing little more than his 
name and the date of his birth and death, 
near the foot of the stately monument of tibe 
Villerois. Emily remained at his grave till a 
chime thstt called the monks to esuly prayers 
warned her to retire ; then she wept over it a 
last farewell, and forced herself from the spot. 
After this hour of melancholy indulgence, she 
was refreshed by a deeper sleep than she had 
experienced for a long time ; and on a^K^en- 
ing, her mind was more tranquil and resigned 
than it had been since St Aubert's death. 

But when the moment of her departure 
from the convent arrived, all her grief re- 
turned : the memory of the dead, and the 
kindness of the living, attached her to th6 
place ; and for the sacred spot where her 
father's remains were interred, she seemed to 
feel all those tender affections which we con- 
ceive for home. The abbess repeated many 
kind assurances of regard at their parting, 
and pressed her to return, if ever she should 
And her condition elsewhere unpleasant; 
many of the nuns also expressed unaffected 
regret at her departure ; and Emily left the 
convent with many tears, and followed by 
sincere wishes for her happiness. 

She had travelled several leagues, before the 
scenes of the country through which she 
passed had power to rouse her for a moment 
from the deep melancholy into which she was 
sunk ; and when they did, it was only to 
remind her that on the last view of them St. 
Aubert was at her side, and to call up to her 
remembrance the remarks he had delivered 
on similar scenery. Thus, without any par- 
ticular occurrence, passed the 'day in languor 
and dejection. She slept that night at a town 
on the skirts of Languedoc, and on the 
following morning entered Gascony. 

Toward the close of this day Emily came 
within view of the plains in the neighbourhood 
of La Val^e, and the well-known objects of 
former times began to press upon her notice, 
and, with them, recollections that awakened 
all her tenderness and grief. Often, while 
she looked through her tears upon the wild 
grandeur of the Pyrenees, now varied with, 
the rich \\gh\s «a^ ^^qaj^lOp^^ ^\ ^H«&SiV ^^'^^ 



4« THE MYSTERIES O^ VDOLPHO. 

remembered that, when last she saw them, Theresa, whose feelings were more awakened 
her father partook with her of the pleasure than her delicacy ; ' Manchon 's gone to look 
they inspired. Suddenly some scene which for him.' 

he had particularly pointed out to her would Emily sobbed aloud ; and on looking to- 
present itself, and the sick languor of despair wards the carriage, which still stood with the 
would steal upon her heart. 'There!' she door open, saw the animal spring into it, and 
would exclaim — ' there are the very cliffs, instantly leaped out, and then, with his nose 
there the wood of pines, which he looked at on the ground, run round the horses, 
with such delight as we passed this road ' Don't cry so, xna'amselle,' said Theresa ; 
together for the last time ! There, too, under ' it breaks my heart to see you.' The dog 
the crag of that mountain, is the cottage, now came running to Emfly, then returned to 
peeping from among the cedars, which he the carriage, and then bade i^jain to her, 
bade me remember, and copy with my pencil 1 whini^ and discontented. * Pow rogue !' 
O my father, shall I never see you more I' said Theresa, ' thou hast lost thy master — 

As she drew near the chateau, these melan- thou mayest well ay ! But come, my dear 
choly memorials of past times multiplied, young lady, be comforted. What shall I get 
At length the chateau itself appeared, amid to refresh you?* 

the glowing beauty of St. Aubert's favourite Emily gave her hand to the old servant, 
laundscape. This was an object which called and tried to restrain her grief, while she made 
for fortitude, not for tears : Emily dried hers, some kind inquiries concerning her health, 
and prepared to meet with calmness the trying But she still lingered in the ivalk which led to 
moment of her return to that home where the chateau — ^for within was no person to 
there was no longer a parent to welcome her, meet her with the kiss of affection : her own 
' Yes, said she ; let me not forget the lessons heart no longer palpitated with impatient joy 
he has taught me ! How often he has pointed to meet again the well-known smile ; and she 
out the necessity of resisting even virtuous dreaded to see objects which would recall the 
sorrow ! how often we have admired together full remembrance of her former happiness, 
the greatness of a mind that can at once suJffer She moved slowly towards the door, paused, 
and reason ! O my father ! if you are per- went on, and paused again. How silent, 
mitted to look down upon your child, it will how forsaken, how forlorn, did the chateau 
please you to sec that she remembers, and appear ! Trembling to enter it, yet blaming 
endeavours to practise, the precepts you have herself for delaying what she could not avoid, 
given her. she at length passed into the hall, crossed it 

. A turn on the road now allowed a nearer with a hurried step as if afraid to look round, 
view of the chateau ; the chimneys, tipped and opened the door of that room which she 
with light, rising from behind St. Aubert's was wont to call her own. The gloom of 
favourite oaks, whose foliage partly concealed evening gave solemnity to its silent and 
the lower part of the building. Emily could deserted air. The chairs, the tables, every 
not suppress a heavy sigh. 'This, too, was article of furniture, so familiar to her in 
his favourite hour !' said she, as she gazed happier times, spoke eloquently to her heart 
upon the long evening shadows stretched She seated herself, without inunediately ob- 
athwart the landscape. ' How deep the repose ! serving it, in a window which opened upon the 
how lovely the scene ! — lovely and tranquil as garden, and where St. Aubert had often sat 
in fomier days !' with her watching the sun retire from the rich 

Again she resisted the pressure of sorrow and extensive prospect that appeared beyond ' 
till her ear caught the gay melody of the the groves. 

dance, which she had so often listened to as Having indulged her tears for some time, 
she walked with St. Aubert on the margin of she became more composed ; and when 
the Garonne ; when all her fortitude forsook Theresa, after seeing the baggage deposited 
her ; and she continued to weep till the car- in her lady's room, again appeared, she had 
riage stopped at the little gate that opened so far recovered her spirits as to be able 
upon what was now her own territory. She to converse with her. 

raised her eyes on the sudden stoppage of the ' I have made up the green bed for you, 
carriage, and saw her father's old housekeeper ma'amselle,' said Theresa, as she set the coffee 
coming to open the gate. Manchon also upon the table : ' I thought you would like it 
came running and barking before her, and better than your own now, ; but I little 
when his young mistress alighted, fawned and thought, this day month, that you would 
played round her, gasping with joy. come back alone. A-well-a-day I the news 

•Dear Ma'amselle I' said Theresa, and almost broke my heart when it did come. 
paused, and looked as if she would have Who would have believed that my poor 
offered something of condolement to Emily, master, when he went from home, would 
Whose tea^ now prevented reply. The dog never return again ! ' 

still tajvned and ran round her, and then flew Emily hid her face with her handkerchief, 
lONvards the carriage with a short quick bark, and waved her hand. 

^«/ mu amselle I my poor master I' said ' Do taste the coffee/ said Theresa. • My 



TBE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



49 



dear young lady, be comforted — ^we must all 
die. My dear master is a saint above, ' 

Emily took the handkerchief from her face, 
and raised her eyes, full of tears, towards 
heaven. Soon after she dried them, and in a 
calm but tremulous voice began to inquire con- 
cerning some of her late father's pensioners. 

' Alas-a-day ! ' said Theresa, as she poured 
out the coffee and handed it to her mistress, 
' all that could come have been here every 
day to inquire after you and my master.' 
She then proceeded to tell, that some were 
dead whom they had left well ; and others, 
who were ill, had recovered. .'And see, 
ma'amselle,' added Theresa ; ' there is old 
Mary coming up the garden now ; she has 
looked every day these three years as if she 
would die, yet she is alive still. She has 
seen the chaise at the door, and knows you 
are come home. ' 

The sight of this poor old woman would 
have been too much for Emily, and she begged 
Theresa would go and tell her that she was 
too ill to see any person that night. ' To- 
morrow I shall be better, perhaps ; but give 
her this token of my remembrance. ' 

Emily sat for some time given up to sorrow. 
Not an object on which her eye glanced but 
awakened some remembrance that led im- 
mediately to the subject of her grief. Her 
favourite plants, which St. Aubert had taught 
her to nurse ; the little drawings that adorned 
* the room, which his taste had instructed her 
to execute ; the books that he had selected for 
her use, and which they had read together ; 
her musical instruments, whose sounds he 
loved so well, and which he sometimes 
awakened himself — every object gave new 
force to sorrow. At length she roused her- 
self from this melancholy indulgence ; and 
summoning all her resolution, stepped for- 
ward to go into those forlorn rooms, which, 
though she dreaded to enter, she knew would 
yet more powerfully affect her if she delayed 
to visit them. 

Having passed through the green-house 
her courage for a moment forsook her when 
she opened the door of the library ; and per- 
haps, the shade which evening and the 
foliage of the trees near the windows threw 
across the room, heightened the solemnity of 
her feelings on entering that apartment where 
every thing spoke of her father. There was 
an arm chair in which he used to sit : she 
dirunk when she observed it ; for she had so 
often seen him seated there, and the idea of him 
rose so distinctly to her mind, that she almost 
fancied she saw him before her. But she 
checked the illusions of a distempered 
imagination, though she could not subdue a 
certain deg^ree of awe which now mingled with 
her emotions. She walked slowly to the chair, 
and seated herself in it. There was a read- 
ing-desk before it, on which lay a book, open, 
as it bad been left by her father. It was some 



moments before she recovered courage enough 
to examine it ; and when she looked at the 
open page, she immediately recollected that 
St. Aubert, on the evening before his depar- 
ture from the chateau, had read to her some 
passages from this his favourite author. The 
circumstances now effected her extremely : 
she looked at the page, wept and looked again. 
To her the book appeared sacred and in- 
valuable ; and she would not have moved it, 
or closed the page which he had left open, for 
the treasures of the Indies. Still she sat be- 
fore the desk ; and could not resolve to quit 
it, though the increasing gloom, and the pro- 
found silence of the apartment, revived a de- 
gree of painful awe. Her thoughts dwelt on 
the probable state of departed spirits ; and 
she remembered the affecting conversation 
which passed between St. Aubert and La 
Voisin on the night preceding his death. 

As she mused, she saw the door slowly 
open ; and a rustling sound in a remote part 
of the room startled her. Through the dusk 
she thought she perceived something move. 
The subject she had been considering, and the 
present state of her spirits, which made her 
imagination respond to every impression of 
her senses, gave her a sudden terror of some- 
thing supernatural. She sat for a moment 
motionless ; and then her dissipated reason 
returning, 'What should I fear?' said she ; 
' if the spirits of those we love ever return 
again to us, it is in kindness.' 

The silence which again reigned, made 
her ashamed of her late fears, and she be- 
lieved that her imagination had deluded her, 
or that she had heard one of those unaccount- 
able noises which sometimes occur in old 
houses. The same sound, however, returned ; 
and, distinguishing something moving towards 
her. and in the next instant press beside her 
into the chair, she shrieked ; but her fleeting 
senses were instantly recalled, on perceiving 
that it was Manchon who sat by her, and 
who now licked her hand affectionately. 

Perceiving her spirits unequal to the task 
she had assigned herself, of visiting the deser- 
ted rooms of the chateau this night, when she 
left the library she walked into the garden, 
and down to the terrace that overhung the 
river. The sun was now set ; but under the 
dark branches of the almond trees was seen 
the saffron glow of the west, spreading be- 
yond the twilight of middle air. The bat 
flitted silently by ; and now and then the 
mourning note of the nightingale was heard. 

The circumstances of the hour brought to 
her recollection some lines which she had 
once heard St. Aubert recite on this very spot, 
and she had now a melancholy pleasure in 
repeating them. 

SONNET. 

Now the bat circles on. the breex^ <a.^ «^fe. 
That creeps, \xi !^u^^wxv^%»x&,«^.w^?j,^^-««»^» 



$0 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPBO, 



A:.d trembles 'mid the woods and through the 
cave, 
Wliobc luiicly ii^hs iLe waudercr deceive : 

For oft. when Mclancljoly charms his mind, 
JIc thinks the Spirit of the rock he hears, 
Nur listens, Li:l witli s Meetly-thrilling feax5« 

To the low mystic murniur& of the windl 

Now the bat circles ; and the twilight-dev 
Falls silent round, and o'er the mountain-cHffj 
Tht gleaming wave, and far discover'd sViff, 

Spreads the gray veil of soft, harmonious hue. 

So falls o'er Grief the dew of Pity's tear, 
iJiuiiiiiiig her lonely visions of despair. 

Emily, wandering on, came to St. Aubert's 
favourite plane-tree, where so often, at this 
hour, they had sat beneath the shade together, 
and with her dear mother so often had con- 
versed on the subject of a future state. How 
often, too, had her father expressed the com- 
fort he derived from believing that they should 
meet in another world I Emily, overcome by 
these recollections, left the plane-tree ; and as 
she leaned pensively on the wall of the terrace, 
she observed a group of peasants dancing 
gaily on the banks of the Garonne, which 
sprearl in broad expanse below, and reflected 
the evening llfi:ht. What a contrast they 
formed to the desolate, unhappy Emily I They 
were gay and debonnaire, as they were wont 
to be when she, too, was gay — ^when St. Aubert 
used to listen to their merry music, with a coun- 
tenance beaming pleasure and benevolence. 
Emily, having looked for a moment on this 
sprightly band, turned away, unable to bear 
the remembrances it excited ; but where, alas I 
could she turn, and not meet new objects to 
give acuteness to grief ! 

As she walked slowly towards the house, 
she was met by Theresa. 

' Dear Ma'amsclle,' said she, ' I have been 
seeking you up and down this half-hour, and 
was afraid some accident had happened to 
you. How can you like to wander about so in 
this night air? Do come into the house. 
Think what my poor master would have said, 
if he could sec you. I am sure, when my 
dear lady died, no gentleman could take it 
more to heart than he did ; yet you know he 
seldom shed a tear. ' 

• Tray, Theresa, cease,' said Emily, wishing 
to interrupt this ill-judged but well-meaning 
harangue. 

Theresa's loquacity, however, was not to be 
silenced so easily. 

'And when you used to grieve so,' she 
added, ' he often told you how wrong it was — 
for that my mistress was happy. And if she 
was happy, I am sure he is so too ; for the 
prayers of the poor, they .•=ay, reach heaven.' 

During this speech, Emily had walked 
silently into the chateau, and Theresa lighted 
iier across the hall into the common silting- 
pjirlour, where she had laid the cloth with one 
solitary knife and fork for supper. Emily 
".75y/j tlicroom before she perceived thai \l 



was not her own apgTtmftnt ; bcrt she dnednd 
the emotion whidi inclined ber^o leave it. 
and seated herself qnielly by the little supper- 
table. Her lather's hat hun^ upon the oppo- 
site wall : while she gaaod at it a faintaess 
came over her. Theresa looked at her, and 
then at the object on iriiich her eyes were 
settled, and went to remove it ; but Emilj 
waved her hand. 

' No.' said she, ' let h lemam ; I am going 
to my chamber.' 

' Nay. Ma'amselle, snpp^ is ready.' 

' I cannot take it.' replied Emfly ; I will go 
to my room, and tij to sleepi 'To-monrow I 
shall be better.' 

'l^is is poor doings r said Theresa. 'Dear 
lady ! do take some food I I have dressed a 
pheasant, and a fine one it is. Old Monsieur 
Barreauz sent it this mcnning ; for I saw him 
yesterday, and told him you were coining ; 
and I know nobody that seemed more con- 
cerned, when he heard the sad news than 
he.' 

' Did he?* said Emfly, in a tender voice, 
while she felt her poor heart warmed for a 
moment by a ray of sympatliy. 

At length her spirits were entirely over- 
come, and she retired to her room. 



CHAPTER X. 

' Can Music's voice, can Beauty's eye; 
Can Painting's glowing hand, supply 
A charm so suited to my mind, 
As blows this hollow gust of wind ; 
As drops this little weeping rill 
Soft tinkling down the moss-grown hill ; 
While through the west, where sinks the crimson 

day, 
Meek Twilight slowly sails, and waves her faannen 
grayf 

Mason. 

Emily, some time after her return to La 
Vallde, received letters from her aunt, Madame 
Cheron, in which, after some common-place 
condolement and advice, she invited her to 
Thoulouse, and added, that, as her late 
brother had intrusted Emily's education to 
her, she should consider herself bound to 
overlook her conduct. Emily, at tliis time, 
wished only to remain at La Vallde, in the 
scenes of her early happiness, now rendered 
infinitely dear to her, as the residence of those 
whom she had lost for ever ; where she could 
weep unobser\'ed, retrace their steps, and 
remember each minute particular of their 
manners. But she was equally anxious to 
avoid the displeasure of Madame Cheron. 

Though her affection would not suffer her 
to question, even for a moment, the propriety 
of St. Aubert's conduct in appointing Maudanie 
Cheron for her guardian, she was sensible 
that this step had made her happiness depend, 
m a. gi(»x CL^^xQe, QtTL VD&Yx>3asvQus oC her aunt. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



SI 



In her reply, she begged permission to remain 
at present at La VaJl^ ; mentioning the ex- 
treme dejection of her spirits, and the neces- 
sity she felt fcx* quiet and retirement to restore 
them. These she knew were not to be foimd 
at Madame Cheron's, whose inclinations led 
her into a life of dissipation, which her ample 
fortune encouraged. And, having given her 
answer, she felt somewhat more at ease. 

In the first days of her aiHiction she was 
visited by Monsieur Barreaux, a sincere 
mourner for St. Aubert. 

' I may well lament my friend,' said he, ' for 
I shall never meet with his resemblance I If 
I could have found such a man in what is 
called society, I should not have left it.' 

M. Barreaux's admiration of her father 
endeared him extremely to Emily ; whose 
heart found almost its first relief in conversing 
of her parents with a man whom she so much 
revered, and who, though with such an un- 
gracious appearance, possessed so mudi good- 
ness of heart and delicacy of mind. 

Several weeks passed away in quiet retire- 
ment, and Emily's affliction began to soften 
into melancholy. She could b«ir to read the 
books she had before read with her father 
— to sit in his chair in the library — to watch 
the flowers his hand had planted — ^to awaken 
the tones of that instrument his fingers had 
pressed, and sometimes even to play his 
favourite air. 

When her mind had recovered from the 
first shock of afflictions, perceiving the 
danger of yielding to indolence, and that 
activity alone could restore its tone, she scru- 
pulously endeavoured to pass all her hours in 
employment. And it was now that she under- 
stood the full value of the education she had 
received from St. Aubert — for, in cultivating 
her understanding, he had secured her an 
asylum from indolence without recourse to 
dissipation, and rich and varied amusement 
and information independent of the society 
from which her situation secluded her. Nor 
were the good effects of this education con- 
fined to selfish advantages ; since St Aubert 
having nourished every amiable quality of her 
heart, it now expanded in benevolence to all 
around her, and taught her, when she could 
not remove the misfortunes of others, at least 
to soften them by sympathy and tenderness — 
a benevolence that taught her to feel for all 
^ that could suffer. 

Madame Cheron returned no answer to 
Emily's letter ; who began to hope that she 
ishould be permitted to remain some time 
longer in her retirement ; and her mind had 
now so far recovered its strength that she 
ventured to view the scenes which most power- 
fully recalled the images of past times. Among 
these was the fishing-house ; and to indulge 
still more the affectionate melancholy of the 
visit, she took thither her lute, that she might 
^^n hear there the tones to which St. Aubert 



and her mother had so often delighted to listen. 
She went alone, and at that still hour of the 
evening which is so soothing to fancy and to 
grief. 

The last time she had been here she was in , 
company with Monsieur and Madame St 
Aubert, a few days preceding that on which 
the latter was seized with a fatal illness ; now, 
when Emily again entered the woods that sur- 
rounded the building, they awakened so forcibly 
the memory of former times, that her resolution 
yielded for a moment to excess of grief : she 
stopped, leaned for support against a tree, and 
wept for some minutes before she had re- 
covered herself sufficiently to proceed. The 
httle path that led to the building was over- 
grown with grass, and the flowers which St 
Aubert had scattered carelessly along the 
border were almost choked with weedfr— the 
tall thistle, the foxglove, and the nettle. 3he 
often paused to lo(^ on the desolate spot, now 
so silent and forsaken I — ^and when with a trem- 
bling hand she opened the door of the fishing 
house : 

•Ahl' said she, ' e\'erything, everything 
remains as when I left it last — ^left it with 
those who never must return l' 

She went to a window that overhung the 
rivulet, and leaning over it, with her eyes fixed 
on the current, was soon lost in melancholy 
reverie. The lute she had brought lav for- 
gotten beside her : the mournful sighing of 
Uie breeze as it waved the high pines above, 
and its softer whispers among the osiers that 
bowed upon the banks below, was a kind of 
music more in unison with her feelings ; it 
did not vibrate on the chords of unhappy 
memory, but was soothing to the heart as the 
voice of pity. She continued to muse, uncon- 
scious of the gloom of evening, and that the 
sun's last light trembled on the heights above ; 
and would probably have remained so much 
longer if a sudden footstep, without the build- 
ing, had not alarmed her attention, and first 
made her recollect that she was unprotected. 
In the next moment the door opened, and a 
stranger appeared, who stopped on perceivinjg^ 
Emily, and then began to apologise for his 
intrusion. But Emily, at the sound of his 
voice, lost her fear in a stronger emotion : its 
tones were familiar to her ear ; and, though 
she could not readily distinguish through the 
dusk the features of the person who spoke, 
she fdt a remembrance too strong to be dis- 
trusted. 

He repeated his apology, and Emily then 
said something in reply ; when the stranger, 
eagerly advancing, exclaimed : 

' Good God ! can it be ?— surely I am not 
mistaken— Ma'amselle St. Aubert ?— is it not ?* 

'It is indeed,' said Emily, who was con- 
firmed in her first conjecture ; for she now dis- 
tinguished the countenance of Valancourt 
lighted up with still more than its usual aj\v- 



52 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



crowded to her mind ; and the effort which 
she made to support herself only served to 
increase her agitation. 

Valancourt meanwhile, having inquired 
anxiously after her health, and expressed his 
hopes that M. St Auberthad found benefit from 
travelling, learned, from the flood of tears 
which she could no longer repress, the fatal 
truth. He led her to a seat, and sat down by 
her; while Emily continued to weep, and 
Valancourt to hold the hand which she was 
unconscious he had taken, till it was wet with 
tears which grief for St. Aubert and sympathy 
for herself had called forth. 

• I feel,' said he at length, ' I feel how insuf- 
ficient all attempt at consolation must be on 
this subject ; I can only mourn with you ; for 
I cannot doubt the source of your tears. Would 
to God I were mistaken !' 

Emily could still answer only by tears, till 
she rose and begged they might leave the 
melancholy spot ; when Valancourt, though 
he saw her feebleness, could not offer to detain 
■ her, but took her arm within his, and led her 
from the fishing-house. They walked silently 
through the woods ; Valancourt anxious to 
know yet fearing to ask any particulars con- 
cerning St. Aubert, and Emily too much dis- 
tressed to converse. After some time, how- 
ever, she acquired fortitude enough to speak 
of her father, and to give a brief account of 
the manner of his death ; during which recital 
Valancourt's countenance betrayed strong 
emotion ; and when he heard that St. Aubert 
had died on the road, and that Emily had 
been left among strangers, he pressed her 
hand between his, and involuntarily ex- 
claimed, ' Why was I not there !' but in the 
next moment recollected himself, for he imme- 
diately returned to the mention of her father ; 
till, perceiving that her spirits were exhausted, 
he gradually changed the subject, and spoke 
of himself. Emily thus learned that, after 
they had parted, he had wandered for some 
time along the shores of the Mediterranean, 
and had then returned through Languedoe 
into Gascony, which was his native province, 
and where he usually resided. 

When he had concluded his little narrative, 
he sunk into a silence which Emily was not 
disposed to interrupt, and it continued till 
they reached the gate of the chateau, when he 
stopped, as if he had known this to be the 
limit of his walk. Here, saying that it was 
his intention to return to Estuviere on the 
following day, he asked her if she would per- 
mit him to take leave of her in the morning ; 
and Emily, perceiving that she could not 
reject an ordinary civility without expressing 
by her refusal an expectation of something 
more, was compelled to answer that she should 
be at home. 

She passed a melancholy evening, during 

\yhich the retrospect of all that had happened 

ifwce she had seen Valancourt wovdd rise lo 



her imaginadon. and the scene of her father's 
death appeared in tints as fresh as if it had 
passed on the preceding day. She remem- 
bered, particnlarly the earnest and solemn 
manner in which he had required her to destroy 
the manuscript papers; and awakened from 
the lethargy in whidi sorrow had held her, she 
was shocJ^d to think she had not yet obeyed 
him. and determined that another day should 
not reproach her with the ne^ect. 



CHAPTER XL 

*...'.. Can such things be. 
And overcome us like a summer's doad, 
Without our special wonder T 

Macbeth. 

On the next morning Emily ordered a fire to 
be lighted in the stove of the chamber where 
St. Aubert used to sleep, and as soon as she 
had breakfasted went thither to bum the 
papers. Having fast^ied the door to prevent 
interruption, she opened the closet where thc^ 
were concealed ; as she entered which she felt 
an emotion of unusual awe, and stood for 
some moments siuveying it, trembling, and 
almost afraid to remove the board. There 
was a great chair in one comer of the dds^, 
and opposite to it stood the table at which she 
had seen her father sit, on the evening that 
preceded his departure, looking over, with so 
much emotion, what she believed to be these 
very papers. 

The solitary life which Emily had led of 
late, and the melancholy subjects on which 
she had suffered her thoughts to dwell, had 
rendered her at times sensible to the * thick- 
coming fancies ' of a mind greatly enervated. 
It was lamentable that her excellent under- 
standing should have yielded, even for a 
moment, to the reveries of superstition, or 
rather to those starts of imagination which 
deceive the senses into what can be called 
nothing less than momentary madness. In- 
stances of this temporary failure of mind had 
more than once occurred since her return home 
— particularly when wandering through this 
lonely mansion in the evening twilight, die 
had been alarmed by appearances whidh 
would have been unseen in her more cheerful 
days. To this infirm state of her nerves may 
be attributed what she imagined when, her 
eyes glancing a second time on the arm-chair, 
which stood in an obscure part of the closet, 
the countenance of her dead lather appeared 
there. 

Emily stood fixed for a moment to the floor, 
after which she left the closet. Her spirits, 
however, soon returned ; she reproached her- 
self with the weakness of thus suffering inter- 
ruption in an act of serious importance, and 
again opened the door. By the directions 
Y():^cYi^x. K>\\^t\. ba.d g^vea her, she readiljr 



THE MYSTERIES OP U DO LP HO. 



53 



found the board he had described, in an 
opposite comer of the closet, near the window, 
She distinguished also the line he had men- 
tioned ; and pressing it, as he had bade her, 
it slid down and disclosed the bundle of 
papers, together with some scattered ones and 
the purse of louis. With a trembling hand 
she removed them — replaced the board- 
paused a moment — and was rising from the 
floor, when, on looking up, there appeared to 
her alarmed fancy the same countenance in 
the chair. The illusion (another instance of 
the unhappy effect whicn solitude and grief 
had gradually produced upon her mind) sub- 
dued her spirits. She rushed forward into the 
chamber, and sunk almost senseless into a 
chair. 

Returning reason soon overcame the dread- 
ful, but pitiable, attack of imagination, and 
she turned to the papers, though still with so 
little recollection, that her eyes involuntarily 
settled on the writing of some loose sheets 
which lay open ; and she was unconscious 
that she was transgressing her father's strict 
injunction, till a sentence of dreadful import 
awakened her attention and her memory 
together. She hastily put the papers from 
her ; but the words which had roused equally 
her curiosity and terror, she could not dismiss 
from her thoughts. So powerfully had they 
affected her, that she even could not resolve to 
destroy the papers immediately ; and the 
more she dwelt on the circumstance, the more 
it inflamed her imagination. Urged by the 
most forcible, and apparently the most neces- 
sary, curiosity to inquire further concerning 
the terrible and mysterious subject to which 
she had seen an allusion, she began to lament 
her promise to destroy the papers. For a 
moment she even doubted whether it could 
justly be obeyed, in contradiction to such 
reasons as there appeared to be for further 
information ; but the delusion was momentary ; 
* I have given a solemn promise', said she, 'to 
observe a solemn injunction, and it is not my 
business to argue, but to obey. Let me 
hasten to remove the temptation that would 
destroy my innocence, and imbitter my life 
with the consciousness of irremediable guilt, 
while I have strength to reject it.' 

Thus re-animated with a sense of her duty, 
she completed the triumph of her integrity 
over temptation, more forcible than any she 
had ever known, and consigned the papers to 
the flames. Her eyes watched them as they 
slowly consumed : she shuddered at the recol- 
lection of the sentence she had just seen, and 
at the certainty that the only opportunity of 
explaining it was then passing away for ever. 

It was long after this that she recollected 
the purse ; and as she was depositing it, 
unopened, in a cabinet, perceiving that it con- 
4ained something of a size larger than coin, 
she examined it. ' His hand deposited them 
l)ere.' said 5he, as ^Yie Jcissecl some pieces of 



the coin, and wetted them with her tears— 'his 
hand, which is now dust ?' At the bottom of 
the purse was a small packet ; which having 
taken out, and unfolded paper after paper, 
she found to be an ivory case containing the 
miniatiue of a — lady! She started. 'The 
same,' said she, 'my father wept over!' On 
examining the countenance, she could recollect 
no person that it resembled : it was of uncom- 
mon beauty ; and was characterized by an 
expression of sweetness shaded with sorrow 
and tempered by resignation. 

St. Aubert had given no directions concern- 
ing this picture, nor had even named it ; she 
therefore thought herself justified in preserving 
it. More than once remembering his manner 
when he had spoken of the Marchioness of 
Villeroi, she felt inclined to believe that this 
was her resemblance ; yet there appeared no 
reason why he should have po-eserved a 
picture of that lady, or having preserved it, 
why he should lament over it in a manner so 
striking and affecting as she had witnessed on 
the night preceding his.d^)arture. 

Emily still gazed on the countenance, exam- 
ining its features ; but she knew not where to 
detect the charm that captivated her attention, 
and inspired sentiments of such love and pity. 
Dark brown hair played carelessly along the 
open forehead ; the nose was rather indined 
to aquiline ; the lips spoke in a smile, but'it 
was a melancholy one ; the eyes were blue, 
and were directed upwards, with an expression 
of peculiar meekness ; while the soft cloud of 
the brow spoke of the fine sensibility of the 
temper. 

Emily was roused from the musing mood 
into which the picture had thrown her, by 
the closing of the garden gate ; and on 
turning her eyes to the window she saw 
Valancourt coming towards the chateau.. 
Her spirits agitated by the subjects that had 
lately occupied her mind, she felt unprepared 
to see him, and remained a few moments in 
the chamber to recover herself. 

When she met him in the parlour, she was 
struck with the change that appeared in his 
air and countenance since they had parted at 
Rousillon, which twilight, and the distress 
she suffered on the preceding evening had 
prevented her from observing. But dejection 
and languor disappeared for a moment, in 
the smile that now enlightened his counte- 
nance on perceiving her. ' You see.' said he, 
' I have availed myself of the pernnssion with 
which you honoured me — of bidding you fare- 
well, whom I had the happiness of meeting 
only yesterday.' 

Emily smiled faintly, and, anxious to say 
something, asked if he had been long in 
Gascony. 

'A few days only,' replied Valancourt, 
while a blush passed over his cheek. 'I 
engaged in a long ramble after I b»sA ^J^^ 



54 



THE MYSTERIMS OF UDOLPHO. 



had made my wanderings among the Pyrenees 
so delightful' 

A tear came to Emily's eyes as Valancourt 
said this, which he observed, and, anxious to 
draw off her attention from the remembrance 
that had occasioned it, as well as shocked at 
his own thoughtlessness, he began to speak 
on other subjects, expressing his admiration 
of the chateau and its prospects. 

Emily, who felt somewhat embarrassed how 
to support a conversation, was glad of such an 
opportunitv to continue it on different topics. 
They walKcd down to the terrace, where 
Valancourt was charmed with the river 
scenery, and the views over the opposite 
shores of Guicnne. 

As he leaned on the wall of the terrace, 
watching the rapid current of the Garonne, 
' I was a few weeks ago,' said he, ' at the 
source of this noble river ; I had not then the 
happiness of knowing you, or I should have 
regretted your absence — it was a scene so 
exactly suited to your taste. It rises in a part 
of the Pyrenees still wilder and more sublime, 
I think, than any we passed in the way to 
Rousillon.' He then described its fall among 
the precipices of the mountains, where its 
waters, augmented by the streams tliat des- 
cend from the snowy summits around, rush 
into^the VaMe d'Aran ; between those romantic 
heights it foams along, pursuing its way to the 
north-west, till it emerges upon the plains of 
Languedoc ; then, washing the walls of Thou- 
louse, and turning again to the north- 
west, it assumes a milder character, as it 
fertilizes the pastures of Gascony and Guicnne 
in its progress to the Bay of Biscay. 

Emily and Valancourt talked of the scenes 
they had passed among the Pyrenean Alps ; 
as he spoke of which there was often a tremu- 
lous tenderness in his voice ; and sometimes 
he expatiated on them with all the fire of 
genius — sometimes would appear scarcely con- 
scious of the topic, though he continued to 
speak. I'his subject recalled forcibly to 
Emily the idea of her father, whose image 
appeared in every landscape which Valancourt 
particularized, whose remarks dwelt upon her 
memory, and wliose enthusiasm still glowed 
in her heart. Her silence at length reminded 
Valancourt how nearly his conversation ap- 
proached to the occasion of her grief, and he 
changed the subject, though for one scarcely 
less affecting to Emily. When he admired 
the grandeur of the plane-tree, that spread its 
wide branches over the terrace, and under 
whose shade they now sat, she remembered 
how often she had sat thus with St. Aubert, 
and heard him express the same admiration. 

•This >vas a favourite tree with my dear 
father,' said she : ' he used to love to sit under 
its foliage, with his family about him, in the 
fine evenings of summer. 

^^'\bncourt understood her feelings, and 
ms lUvm : Juid ahc nused her eyes from lUc 



ground, ihe would lia¥e seen tears In his. 
He rose, and leaned on the wall of the terrace ; 
from whidi, in a few moments he returned to 
his seat ; then rose again, and appeared to he 
greatly agitated ; while Emily' found her 
spirits so much depnued, that several of her 
attempts to renew the conversation were 
inefEectual Valancourt again sat down ; but 
was still silent, and tzemUed. At length he 
said with a hesitating voice, * This lovely scene 
I am going to leave I — to leave you— perhaps 
for ever I lliese moments may never return I 
I cannot resolve to neglect, though I scarcely 
dare to avail myself cm them. Cet me, how- 
ever, without offending the delicacy of your 
sorrow, venture to d^Iare the admiration I 
must always feel of your goodness — O ! that 
at some future period I might be permitted to 
call it love !' 

Emily's emotion would not su£Eec her to 
reply ; and Valancourt, who now ventured to 
look up, observing her countenance change, 
expected to see her faint, and made an involun- 
tary effort to support her, which recalled 
Emily to a sense of her situation, and to an 
exertion of her spirits. Valancoiut did not 
appear to nodce her indisposition, but when 
he spoke again, his voice told the tenderest 
love. 'I will not presume,' he added, 'to 
intrude this subject longer upon your attenti(m 
at this time ; but I may perhaps be permitted 
to mention, that these parting moments would 
lose much of Uieir bitterness; if I might be 
allowed to hope the declaration I have made 
would not exclude me from your presence in 
future. ' 

Emily made an effort to overcome the con- 
fusion of her thoughts, and to speak. She 
feared to trust the preference her heart 
acknowledged towards Valancourt, and to 
give him any encouragement for hope, on 
so short an acquaintance ; for though, in 
this narrow period, she had observed much 
that was admirable in his taste and disposidon, 
and though these observations had been sanc- 
tioned by the opinion of her father, they were 
not sufficient testimonies of his general worth, 
to determine her upon a subject so infinitely 
important to her future happiness as diat 
which now solicited her attention. Yet, 
though the thought of dismissing Valancourt 
was so very painful to her that she could 
scarcely endure to pause upon it, the con- 
sciousness of this made her tear the partiality 
of her judgment, and hesitate still more to 
encourage that suit for which her own heart 
too tenderly pleaded. The family of Valan- 
coiu't, if not Ills circmnstances, had been 
known to her father, and known to bo 
unexceptionable. Of his circumstances Valan- 
court himself hinted, as far as delicacy would 
permit, when he said he had at {»>esent little 
else to offer but a heart that adorcd her. He 
had solicited only for a distant hope ; and she 
couXOl nQl x«^\^ X^ ^Qi\\>vi, though she 



TtiE MYSTBRIES OP VDOLPHO, 55 

scarcely dared to permit it. At length she esteem ; I will acknowledge that you have 
acquired courage to say, that she must think long possessed it, and — and — ' 
herself honoured by the good opinion of any Valancourt waited impatiently for the con- 
person whom her father had esteemed. elusion of the sentence, but Uie words died on 

•And was I, then, thought worthy of his her lips. Her eyes, however, reflected all the 

esteem ?' said Valancourt, in a voice trembling emotions of her heart. Valancoiut passed in 

with anxiety. Then checking himself, Jie an instant from the impatience of despair to that 

added, 'But pardon the question, I scarcely of joy and tenderness. 

know what I say. If I might dare to hope ' O Emily 1' he exclaimed, • my own Emily 

that you think me not unworthy such honour, — teach me to sustain this moment I Let me 

and might be permitted sometimes to inquire seal it as the most sacred of my life 1' 

after your health, I should now leave you He pressed her hand to his lips ; it was cold 

with comparative tranquillity.' and trembling ; and raising his eyes, he saw 

Emily, after a moment's silence, said : the paleness of her countenance. Tears came 

• I will be ingenuous with you, for I know to her relief, and Valancourt watched in 
you will understand and allow for my situa- anxious silence over her. In a few moments 
tion : you will consider it as a proof of my — she recovered herself, and smiling faintly 
my esteem that I am so. Though I live here through her tears, said : ' Can you excuse this 
in what was my father's house, I live here weakness? My spirits have not yet, I believe, 
alone. I have, alas ! no longer a parent — a recovered from the shock they lately received.* 
parent, whose presence might sanction your ' I cannot excuse myself,' said Valancourt. 
visits. It is unnecessary for me to point out * But I will forbear to renew the subject whidi 
the impropriety of my receiving them.' may have contributed to agitate them, now 

* Nor will 1 affect to be insensible of this,' that I can leave you with the sweet certainty of 
replied Valancourt, adding mournfully — • But possessing your esteem.' 

what is to console me for my candour? I Then, forgetting his resolution, he again 

distress you ; and would now leave the subject spoke of himself : 

if I might carry with me a hope of being some ' You know not,' said he, • the many anxious 

time permitted to renew it — of being-allowed to hours I have passed near you lately, when 

make myself known to your family. ' you believed me, if indeed you honoured me 

Emily was again confused, and again hesi- with a thought, far away. I have wandered 

tated what to reply. She felt most acutely near the chateau, in the still hours of the 

the difficulty — ^the forlornnessof her situation — night, when no eye could observe me. It was 

which did not allow her a single relative, or delightful to know 1 was so near you ; and 

friend to whom she could turn for even a look there was something particularly soothing in 

that might support and guide her in the pre- the thought that I watched round your Imtn- 

sent embarrassing circumstances. Madame tation while you slept. These grounds are 

Cheron, who was her only relative, and ought not entirely new to me. Once I ventured 

to have been this friend, was either occupied by within the fence, and spent one of the happiest 

her* own amusements, or so resentful of the and yet most melancholy hours of my life, in 

reluctance her niece had shown to quit La walking under what I believed to be your 

Valine, that she seemed totally to have aban- window.' 

doned her. Emily inquired how long Valancourt had 

•Ah I I see,' said Valancourt after a long been in the neighbourhood, 

pause, during which Emily had begun and 'Several days,' he replied. 'It was my 

left unfinished two or three sentences. ' I design to avail mjrself of the permission M. St. 

see that I have nothing to hope : my fears Aubert had given me. I scarcely know how 

were too just — you think me unworthy of your to account for it ; but, although I anxiously 

esteem. That fatal journey ! which I con- wished to do this, my resolution always failed 

sidered as the happiest period of my life — when the moment approached, and I con- 

those delightful days were to embitter all my stantly deferred my visit. I lodged in a 

future ones ! How often I have looked back village at some distance, and wandered with 

to them with hope and fear ! — yet never till my dogs among the scenes of this charming 

this moment could I prevail with myself to country, wishing continually to meet you, yet 

regret their enchanting influence.' not daring to visit you.' 

His voice faltered, and he abruptly quitted Having thus continued to converse without 

his seat and walked on the terrace. There perceiving the flight of time, Valancourt at 

wasan expression of despair on his countenance length seemed to recollect himself, 

that affected Emily. The pleadings of her • I must go,' said he mournfully— but it is 

heart overcame, in some degree, her extreme with the hope of seeing you again, of being 

timidity ; and when he resumed his seat, she permitted to pay my respects to yoiu: fanrily : 

said in an accent that betrayed her tender- — let me hear mis nope confirmed by your 

ness : voice.' 

'You do both yourself and me injustice ' My fanaily mVl bt \v^.]a|<^>j Vci ^'sa «k^ Nx>r^ 

when you s&y I thinJr you unworthy of my of my deat laVVicc,* «3Jw\ rAsC^'^. 



S6 



J'HR MYSTERIES OF.UDOLPHO. 



Valanconrt kissed her hand, and still lingered, 
unable to depart ; while Emily sat silently, 
with her eyes bent on the ground ; and Va- 
lancourt, as he gazed on her, considered that 
it would soon be impossible for him to recall, 
even to his memory, the exact resemblance of 
the beautiful countenance he then beheld. 
At this moment a hasty footstep approached 
from behind the plane-tree, and turning her 
eyes, Emily saw Madame Cheron. She felt a 
blush steal upon her cheek, and her frame 
trembled with the emotion of her mind ; but 
she instantly rose to meet her visitor. 

'So niece,' said Madame Cheron, casting 
a look of surprise and inquiry on Valancourt 
— =• So, niece, ! how do you do ? — But I need 
not ask — ^your looks tell me you have already 
reoovered your loss.' 

•My looks do me injustice then, Madame; 
my loss, I know, can never be recovered.' 

'jWell, well ! I will not argue with you : I 
see you have exactly your father's disposition ; 
and let me tell you, it would have been much 
happier for him, poor man 1 if it had been a 
different one. ' 

A look of dignified displeasure, with which 
Emily regarded Madame Cheron while she 
spoke, would have touched almost any other 
heart : she made no other reply ; but intro- 
duced Valancourt, who could scarcely stifle 
the , resentment he felt, and whose bow Ma- 
dame Cheron returned with a slight curtsy 
and a look of supercilious examination. After 
a few moments he took leave of Emily, in a 
manner that hastily expressed his pain, both . 
at his own departure and at leaving her to the 
society of Madame Cheron. 

'Who is that young man?' said her aunt, 
in an accent which equally implied inquisi- 
tiveness and censure : some idle admirer of 
yours, I suppose? But I believed, niece, you 
had a greater sense of propriety than to have 
received the visits of any young man in your 
present unfriended situation. Let me tell 
you, the world will obs%--ve those things ; and 
it will talk — ay, and very freely too. ' 

Emily, extremely shocked at this coarse 
speech, attenipted to interrupt it ; but Madame 
Cheron would proceed, with all the self-im- 
portance of a person to whom power is new. 

' It is very necessary you should be under 
the eye of some person more able to guide 
you than yourself. I, indeed have not much 
leisure for such a task. However, since your 
poor father made ithis last request that I should 
overlook your conduct, I must even take you 
under my care. But this let me tell you, 
niece, that unless you will determine to be 
very conformable to my direction, I shall not 
trouble myself longer about you. ' 

Emily made no attempt to interrupt Madame 
Cheron a second time ; grief, and the pride of 
conscious innocence, kept her silent ; till her 
aunt said, 

'lam now come to take you with me to 



Thoulouse, I am sorry to find that your poor 
father died, after all, in such indifferent cir- 
cumstances : however, I shall take you home 
with me. Ah ! poor man 1 he was always 
more generous than provident, or he would 
not have left his daughter dependent on his 
relations.' 

' Nor has he done so, I hope, madam,' said 
Emily calmly ; ' nor did his pecuniary mis- 
fortunes arise from that noble generosity 
which always distinguished him : 4he afi&irs 
of M. de MottevilTe may, I trust, yet be 
settled without deeply injuring his creditors, 
and in the meantime I should be very happy 
to remain at La Vallte.' . 

' No doubt you would,' replied Madame 
Cheron, with a smile of irony ; ' and I shall 
no doubt consent to this, since I see how 
necessary tranquillity and retirement are to 
restore your spirits. I did not think you 
capable of so much duplicity, niece. When 
you pleaded this excuse for remaining here, I 
foolishly believed it to be a just one, nor ex- 
pected to have found with you so agreeable 

a companion as this M. La Val : I forget 

his name.' 

Emily could no longer endure these cruel 
indignities. 

' It was a just one, madam,' said she ; 'and 
now, indeed, I feel more than ever the value 
of the retirement I then solicited ; and if the 
purport of your visit is only to add insult to 
the sorrows of yoiu* brother's child, she could 
well have spared it.' 

' I see that I have undertaken a very 
troublesome task,' said Madame Cheron, 
colouring highly. 

' I am sure, madam,' said Emily mildly, 
and endeavouring to restrain her tears, ' I am 
sure my father did not mean it to be such. I 
have the happiness to reflect that my conduct 
under his eye was such as he often delighted 
to approve. It would be very painful to me 
to disobey the sister of such a parent ; and, if 
you believe the task will really be so trouble- 
some, I must lament tliat it is yours.* 

' Well, niece, fine speaking signifies little : 
I am willing, in consideration of my poor 
brother, to overlook the impropriety of your 
late conduct, and to try what your future will 
be.' 

Emily interrupted her to beg she would 
explain what was the impropriety she alluded 
to. 

' What impropriety ! — why that of receiving 
the visits of a lover unknown to your family,' 
replied Madam Cheron ; not considering the 
impropriety of which she herself had been 
guilty, in exposing her niece to the possibility 
of conduct so erroneous. 

A faint blush passed over Emily's counten- 
ance ; pride and anxiety struggled in her 
breast ; and, till she recollected that appear- 
ances did, in some degree, justify her aunt's 
suspicvons, ^^\^ covAiiL ucA. t^'s»cS^e to humble 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



57 



herself so far as to enter into the defence of a 
conduct which had been so innocent and un- 
designed on her part. She mentioned the 
manner of Valancourt's introduction to her 
father ; the circumstance of his receiving the 
pistol-shot, and of their afterwards travelling 
together ; with the accidental way in which 
she had met him on the preceding evening. 
She owned he had declared a partiality for 
her, and that he had asked permission to 
address her family. 

' And who is this young adventurer, pray ?' 
said Madam Cheron, ' and what are his pre- 
tensions?' 

'These he must himself explain, madam,' 
replied Emily. 'Of his family my father was 
not ignorant, and 1 believe it is unexception- 
able.' 

She then proceeded to mention what she 
knew concerning it. 

' Oh, then, this it seems is a younger 
brother !' exclaimed her aunt, • and of course 
a beggar. A very fine tale, indeed I And so 
my brother took a fancy to this young man 
after only a few days' acquaintance? But 
that was so like him ! In his youth he was 
always taking these likes and dislikes, when 
no» other person saw any reason for them at 
all : nay, indeed, I have often thought the 
people he disapproved were much more agree- 
able than those he admired. But there is no 
accounting 'for tastes. He was always so 
much influenced by people's countenances! 
Now I, for my part, have no notion of this ; 
it is all ridiculous enthusiasm. What has a 
man's face to do with his character ? Can a 
man of good character help having a dis- 
agreeable face ?' — which last sentence Madam 
Cheron delivered with the decisive air of a 
person who congratulates herself on having 
made a grand discovery, and believes the 
question to be unanswo-ably settled. 

Emily, desirous of concluding the conver- 
sation, inquired if her aunt would accept some 
refreshment ; and Madame Cheron accom- 
panied her to the chateau, but without desist- 
ing from a topic which she discussed with so 
much complacency to herself and severity to 
her niece. 

' I am sorry to perceive, niece,' said she, in 
allusion to somewhat that Emily had said 
concerning physiognomy, ' that you have a 
great many of your father's prejudices, and 
among them those sudden predilections for 
people from their looks. I can perceive that 
you imagine yourself to be violently in love 
with this young adventurer, after an acquaint- 
ance of only a few days. There was some- 
thing, too, so charmingly romantic in the 
manner of your meeting !' 

Emily checked the tears that trembled in 
her eyes, while she said, 

' When my conduct shall deserve this 
severity, madam, you wiU do well to exercise 
it ; till then, justice, if not tenderness, should 



surely restrain it. I have never willingly 
offended you. Now I have lost my parents, 
you are the only person to whom I can look 
for kindness : let me not lament more than 
ever the loss of such parents. ' 

The last words were almost stifled by her 
emotions, and she burst into tears. Remem- 
bering the delicacy and the tenderness of St. 
Aubert, the happy, happy days she had passed 
in these scenes ; and contrasting them with 
the coarse and unfeeling behaviour of Madame 
Cheron, and with the future hours of mortifi- 
cation she must subjnit to in her presence — a 
degree of grief seized her, that almost reached 
despair. Madame Cheron, more offended by 
the reproof which Emily's words conveyed, 
than touched by the sorrow they expressed, 
said nothing that might soften her grief ; but, 
notwithstanding an apparent reluctance to 
receive her niece, she desired her company. 
The love of sway was her ruling passion, and 
she knew it would be highly gratified by taking 
into her house a young orphan, who had no 
appeal from her decisions, and on whom she 
could exercise without control the capricioiis 
humour of the moment. 

On entering the chateau, Madame Cheron 
expressed a desire that she would put up what 
she thought necessary to take to Thoulouse, 
as she meant to set off immediately. Emil^' 
now tried to persuade her to defer the journey 
at least till the next day ; and at length, with 
much difficulty, prevailed. * 

The day passed in the exercise of petty 
tyranny on the part of Madame Cheron, and 
in mournful regret and melancholy anticipap 
tion on that of Emily ; who, when her aunt 
retired to her apartment for the night, went to 
take leave of every other room in this her 
dear native home, which she was now quitting 
for she knew not how long, and for the world 
to which she was wholly a stranger. She 
could not conquer a presentiment, which fre- 
quently occurred fO her this night — that irfie 
should never more return to La Valine; 
Having passed a considerable time in what 
had been her father's study ; having selected 
some of his favourite authors to put up with 
her clothes, and shed many tears as she 
wiped the dust from their covers ; she seated 
herself in his chair before the reading-desk, 
and sat lost in melancholy reflection ; till 
Theresa opened the door to examine, as was 
her custom before she went to bed, it was all 
safe. She started on observing her young 
lady, who bade her come in, and then gave 
her some directions for keeping the chateau in 
readiness for her reception at all times. 

' Alas-a-day ! that you should leave it !' said 
Theresa : ' I think you would be happier here 
than where you are going, if one may judge.' 

Emily made no reply to this remark. The 
sorrow Theresa proceeded to express at her 
departure affected her ; but she found some. 



55 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



old servant, to whom she gave such directions why must I leave yoa? In your letreats I 
as might best conduce to her comfort during should still find safety and repose. Sweet 
her ovk'n absence. hours of my childhood — I am now to leave 

Having dismissed Theresa to bed, Emily even your last memorials 1 No objects that 
wandered through every lonely apartment of would revive your inqpressions will remain for 
the chateau, lingering long in what had been me !' 

her father's bed-room, indulging melancholy Then drying her tears, and looking' up, her 
yet not unpleasing emotions; and ha\ing thoughts rose again to the sublime subject she 
often returned within the door to take another had contemplated : the same divine oompla- 
lookatit, she withdrew to her own chamber, cency' stole over her heart, and hushing its 
From her window she gazed upon the garden throbs, inspired hope and confidence and re- 
bdow, shown faintly by the moon rising over signation to the will of the Deity, whose works 
the tops of the palm-trees ; and at length the filled her mind \kith adoration, 
calm beauty of the night increased a desire Emily gazed long on the plane>tree, and 
of indulging the mournful s>iv-eetness of bidding then seated herself for the last timeon thebmch 
farewell to the beloved shades of her child- under its shade, where she had so often sat 
hood, till she was tempted to descend, with her parents ; and where, only a few hoiurs 
Throwing over her the light veil in which before, she had conversed with Valancourt ; at 
she usually walked, she silently passed into the remembrance of whom, thus revived, a 
the garden, and, hastening towards the dis- mingled sensation of esteem, tenderness, and 
tant groves was glad to breathe once more the anxiety, rose in her breast Wth this remem- 
air of Uberty, and to sigh unobserved. The brance occurred a recollection of his late 
deep repose of the scene, the rich scents that confession — that he had often wandered near 
floated on the breeze, the grandeur of the her habitation in the night, having even passed 
wide horizon and of the clear blue arch, the boundary of the garden ; and it immedi- 
soothcd, and gradually elevated her mind to ately occurred to her that he might be at this 
that sublime complacency, which renders the moment in the grounds. The fear of mfteting 
vexations of this world so insignificant and him, particularly after the declaration he had 
mean in our eyes, that we wonder they have made, and of incurring a censure which her 
had power for a moment to disturb us. Emily aunt might so reasonably bestow, if it was 
foi^ot Madame Cheron and all the drcum- known that she was met by her lover at t|^ 
stances c^ her conduct, while her thoughts hour, made her instantly leave her beloved 
ascended to the contemplation of those un- plane-tree, and walk towards the chateau. 



numbered worlds that lie scattered in the 
depths of ether — thousands of them hid 
from human eyes, and almost beyond the 
flight of human fancy. As her imagination 
soared through the regions of space, and 
aspired to that Great First Cause wliich pcr- 



IShe cast an anxious eye around, and often 
stopped for a moment to examine the 
shadowy scene before she ventured to pro- 
ceed : but she passed on without perceivii^ 
any person, till, having reached a dump of 
almond- trees, not far from the house, she 



vades and governs all being, the idea of her rested to take a retrospect of the garden,. and 



fiither scarcely ever left her ; but it was a 
pleasing idea, since she resigned him to God 
m the full confidence of a pure and holy faith. 
She pursued her way through the groves to 
the terrace, often pausing as memory 
awakened the pang of affection, and as 
reason anticipated the exile into which she 
was going. 

And now the moon was high over the 

woods, touching their summits with yellow 

light. • - - 
level 



to sigh forth another adieu : — as her eyes 
wandered over the landscape, she thought 
she perceived a person em^ige from the 
groves, and pass slowly along a moon-light 
alley that led between them ; but the distance, 
and the imperfect light, would not suffer her 
to judge with any degree of certainty whether 
this was fancy or r^ty. She continued to 
gaze for some time on the spot ; till on the 
dead stillness of the air she heard 



a sudden 

and darting between the foliage long sound, and in the next instant fancied she 

beams ; while on the apid Garonne distinguished footsteps near hor. Wasting 



below, the trembling radiance was faintly ob- not another moment in conjecture, she hurried 
scured by the lightest vapoiu:. Emily long to the chateau, and, having reached it, retired 
watched the playing lustre ; listened to the to her chamber, where as she closed her 
soothing murmur of the current, and the yet window she looked upon the garden, and 
lighter sounds of the air as it stirred at inter- then again thought that she distingui^ed a 
vals the lofty palm-trees. figure gliding between the almond-trees she 

' How delightful is the sweet breath of had just left. She immediately withdrew from 
these groves I' said she. ' This lovely scene ! the casement, and, tliough much agitated. 



—how often shall I remember and regret it 
when I am far away ; Alas ! what events may 
occur before I see it again I O peaceful, 
happy shades J— scenes of my infant delights, 
of parental tenderness now lost for ever \— 



sought in sleep 
oblivion. 



the refreshment of a short 



"rtJE MYSTEklkS OF UDOLPHO. 



S9 



CHAPTER XII. 

'. . . . I leave that flowery path for aye 
Of childhood, where I sported many a day. 
Warbling and sauntering carelessly along ; 
Where every face was innocent and gay ; 
Each vale romantic ; tuneful every tongue — 
Sweet, wild, and artless, all.' 

The Minstrel. 

At an early hour the carriage which was to 
take Emily and Madame Cheron to Thoulouse 
appeared at the door of the chateau ; and 
Madame was already in the breakfast-room 
when her niece entered it. The repast was 
sflent and melancholy on the part of Emily ; 
and Madame Cheron, whose vanity was 
piqued on observing her dejection, reproved 
her in a manner that did not contribute to 
remove it. It was with much reluctance that 
Emily's request to take with her the dog, 
which had been a favourite of her father, was 
granted. Her aunt, impatient to be gone, 
ordered the carriage to draw up ; and while 
she passed to the hall door, Emily gave 
another look into the library, and another 
farewell glance over the garden, and then 
followed. Old Theresa stood at the door to 
take leave of her young lady. ' God for ever 
keep you, Ma'amselle !' said she ; while 
Emily gave her hand in silence, and could 
answer only with a pressure of her hand and 
a forced smile. 

At the gate which led out of the grounds, 
several of her father's pensioners were assem- 
bled to bid her farewell ; to whom she would 
have spoken, if her aunt would have suffered 
the driver to stop ; and having distributed to 
them almost all the money she had about her, 
^e sunk back in the carriage, yielding to the 
melancholy of her heart. Soon after, she 
caught between the steep banks of the road 
another view of the chateau peeping from 
among the high trees, and surrounded by 
green slopes and tufted groves ; the Garonne 
winding its way beneath their shades, some- 
times lost among the vineyards, and then 
rising in greater majesty in the distant 
pastures. The towering precipices of the 
Pyrenees, that rose to the south, gave Emily 
a thousand interesting recollections of her late 
journey ; and these objects of her former 
enthusiastic admiration now excited only sor- 
row and regret. Having p^azed on the chateau 
and its lovely scenery till the banks again 
closed upon them, her mind became too much 
occupied by mournful reflections to permit 
her to attend to the conversation which Ma- 
dame Cheron had begun on some trivial 
topic ; so that they soon travelled in profound 
silence. 

Valancourt, meanwhile, was returned to 
Estuviere, his heart occupied with the image 
of Emily ; sometimes indulging in reveries of 
future happiness, but more frecjuently shrink- 
ing with dread of the opposition he might 
encounter from her family. He was the 



younger son of an ancient fiamily of Gascony ; 
and having lost his parents at an early period 
of his life, the care of his education and of his 
small portion had devolved to his brother the 
Count de Duvamey, his senior by nearly 
twenty years. Vakmcourt had he&a. edu- 
cated in all the accomplishments of his age, 
and had an ardour of spirit and a certain 
grandeur of mind, that gave him particular 
excellence in the exercises then thought 
heroic. His little fortune had been dimin- 
ished by the necessary expenses of his edu- 
cation ; but M. La Valancourt the elder 
seemed to think that his genius and accom- 
plishments would amply supply the deficiency 
of his inheritance. They offered frittering 
hopes of promotion hi the military profession 
— in those times almost the only one in which 
a gentleman could engage without incurring a 
stain on his name ; and La Valancourt was of 
course enrolled in the army. The general 
genius of his mind was but little understood 
by his brother. That ardour for whatever 
is great and good in the moral world, as well as 
in the natural one, displayed itself in his infant 
years ; and the strong indignation which he felt 
and expressed at a crimiiml or a mean action, 
sometimes drew upon him the displeasure of 
his tutor ; who reprobated it under the general 
term of violence of temper ; and who, when 
haranguing on the virtues of mildness and 
moderation, seemed to forget the gentleness 
and compassion which always appeu^ in his 
pupil towards objects of misfortune. 

He had now obtained leave of absence from 
his regiment, when he made the excursion into 
the F^enees which was the means of intro- 
ducing him to St. Aubert ; and as this pet- 
mission was nearly expired, he was the more 
anxious to declare himself to Emily's family, 
from whom he reasonably apprehended oppo- 
sition, since his fortune, though wiu a 
moderate addition from hers it would be suffi- 
cient to support them, would not satisfy the 
views either of vanity or ambition. Valancourt 
was not without the latter ; but he saw golden 
visions of promotion in the army, and believed 
that, with Emily, he could in the meantime be 
delighted to live within the limits of his humble 
income. His thoughts were now occupied in 
considering the means of making nimself 
known to her family to whom, however, he 
had yet no address ; for he was entirely ig- 
norant of Emily's precipitate departure from 
La Val6e, of whom he hoped to obtain it. 

Meanwhile the travellers pursued their 
journey ; Emily making frequent efforts to 
appear cheerful, and too often relapsii^g ftito 
sUence and dejection. Madame Cheron attri- 
buting her melancholy solely to the circtmi- 
stance of her being removed to a distance 
from her lover, and believing that the sorrow 
which her niece still expressed for the loss of 
St. Aubert proceeded partly from an affecta.- 
tion of sensibility, otAbw^ovjssA v^ xcaiesi >x 



eo 



TUB MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHQ. 



appear ridiculous to her, that such deep 
regret continued to be felt so long after the 
period usually allowed for grief. 

At length these unpleasant lectures were 
intemipted by the arrival of the travellers at 
Thoulouse ; and Emily, who had not been 
there for many years, and had only a very faint 
recollection of it, was surprised at the ostenta- 
tious style exhibited in her aunt's house and 
furniture ; the more so, jierhaps, because it 
was so totally different from the modest ele- 
gance to which she had been accustomed. 
She followed Madame Cheron through a 
large hall, where several servants in rich 
liveries appeared, to a kind of saloon fitted up 
with more show than taste ; and her aunt, 
complaining of fatigue, ordered supper imme- 
diately. ' 1 am glad to find myself in my own 
house again.' said she, throwing herself on a 
large settee, 'and to have my own people 
about me. I detest travelling : though, in- 
deed, I ought to like it, for what I see abroad 
always makes me delighted to return to my 
o^^'n chateau. What makes you so silent, 
child? — what is it that disturbs you now?' 

Emily suppressed a starting tear, and tried 
to smile away the expression of an oppressed 
heart : she was thinking of her home, and felt 
too sensibly the arrogance and ostentatious 
vanity of Madame Chcron's conversation. 
• Can this be my father's sister I' said she to 
herself ; and then, the conviction that she was 
so warming her heart with something like 
kindness towards her, she felt anxious to 
soften the harsh impression her mind had 
received of her aunt's character, and to show 
a willingness to oblige her. The effort did 
not entirely fail ; she listened with apparent 
cheerfulness while Madame Cheron expa- 
tiated on the splendour of her house, told of 
the numerous parties she entertained, and 
what she should expect of Emily, whose 
diffidence assumed the air of reserve, which 
her aunt, believing it to be that of pride and 
ignorance united, now took occasion to repre- 
hend. She knew nothing of the conduct of a 
mind that fears to trust its own powers ; 
which, possessing a nice judgment, and in- 
chning to believe that every other person 
perceives still more criiically, fears to commit 
itself to censure, and seeks shelter in the 
obsctu"ity of silence. lunily had frequently 
blushed at the fearless manners which she had 
seen admired, and the brilliant nothings which 
she had heard applauded ; yet this applause, 
so far from encouraging her to imitate the con- 
duct that had won it, rather made her shrink 
into the reserve that would protect her from 
such absurdity. 

Madame Cheron looked on her niece's 
diffidence with a feeling very near to con- 
tempt, and endeavoured to overcome it by 
reproof, rather than to encourage it by gentle- 

The entrance of supper somewhat inter- 



rupted the complacent discourse of Madame 
Cheron, and the painful considerations which 
it had forced upon Emily. When the repast 
(which was rendered ostentatious by the attend- 
ance of a great number of servants, and by a 
profusion of plate) was over, Madame Cheron 
retired to her chamber, and a female servant 
came to show Emily to hers. Having passed 
up a large staircase, and through several 
galleries, they came to a flight of back stairs, 
which led into a short passage in a remote 
part of the chateau ; and there the servant 
opened the door of a small chamber, which 
she said was Ma'amselle Emily's ; who, once 
more alone, indulged the tears.she had long 
tried to restrain. 

Those who know from experience how much 
the heart becomes attached even to inanimate 
objects to which it has been long accustomed 
— how unwillingly it resigns them — how, with 
the sensations of an old friend, it meets them 
after temporary absence, >vill understand the 
forlornness of Emily's feelings— of Emily shut 
out from the only home she had known from 
her infancy, and thrown upon a scene and 
among persons, disagreeable for more qualities 
tlKin their novelty. Her father's favourite dog, 
now in the chamber, thus seemed to acquire 
the character and importance of a friend; 
and as the animal fawned over her when she 
wept, and licked her hands, 

' Ah, poor Manchon !' said she, * I have no- 
body now to love me — ^but you !' and she wept 
the more. 

After some time, her thoughts returning to 
her father's injunctions, she remembered how 
often he had blamed her for indulging useless 
sorrow — how often he had pointed out to her 
the necessity of fortitude and patience ; assur- 
ing her, that the faculties of the mind strengthen 
by exertion, till they finally unnerve affliction, 
and triumph over it. These recollections dried 
her tears, gradually soothed her spirits, and 
inspired her with the sweet emulation of 
practising precepts which her father had so 
frequently inculcated. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

* Some power impart the spear and shield. 
At wliicli the wizard passions fly, 
Uy which the giant follies die I' 

Collins. 

Madame Ciieron's house stood at a little 
distance from the city of Thoulouse, and was 
surrounded by extensive gardens, in whidi 
Emily, who had arisen early, amused herself 
with wandering before breakfast. From a 
terrace, that extended along the highest part 
of them, was a wide view over Languedoc. 
On the distant horizon to the south she dis- 
covered the wild summits of the Pyrenees, 
and her fancy immediately painted the green 



THE MYSTERIES OP VDOLPHO. 6i 

pastures of Gascony at their feet. Her heart it ; and soon after she concluded the subject 

pointed to her peaceful home — to the neigh- by saying, ' I never trust people's assertions : 

bourhood where Valancourt was — where St. I always judge of them by their actions. But 

Aubert had been; and her imagination, I am willing to try what will be yoiu* behaviour 

piercing the veil of distance, brought that in future.' 

Dome to her eyes in all its interesting and Emily, less surprised by her aunt's modera- 

romantic beauty. She experienced an inex- tion and mysterious silence, than by the 

pressible pleasure in believing that she beheld accusation she had received, deeply con- 

the country around it, though no feature could sidered the latter, and scarcely doubted that 
be distinguished, except the retiring chain of it was Valancourt whom she had seen at 

the P)rrenees ; and, inattentive to the scene night in the gardens of La Vall^, and that 
immediately before her, and to the flight of he had been observed there by Madame 

time, she continued to lean on the window of a Cheron ; who now, passing from one painful 

pavilion that terminated the terrace, with her topic only to revive another almost equally so, 

eyes fixed on Gascony, and her mind occupied spoke of the situation of her niece's property 

with the interesting ideas which the view of it in the hands of M. Motteville. While she 

awakened, till a servant came to tell her thus talked with ostentatious pity of Emily's 

breakfast was ready. Her thoughts thus re- misfortunes, she failed not to inculcate the 

called to the surrounding objects, the straight duties of humility and gratitude, or to render 
walks, square parterres, and artificial foun- . Emily fully sensible of every cruel mortifica- 

tains of the garden, could not fail, as she tion: who soon perceived that she was to be 

passed through it, to appear the worse, op- considered as a dependant, not only by her 

posed to the negligent graces and naturul aunt, but by her aunt's servants, 

beauties of the grounds of La Val^, upon She was now informed that a large party 

which her recollection had been so intensively were expected to dinner ; on which account 

employed. Madame Cheron repeated the lesson of the 

'Whither have you been rambling so early?' preceding night, concerning her conduct in 

said Madame Cheron, as her niece entered company ; and Emily wished that she might 

the breakfast-room ; ' I don't approve of these have courage enough to practise it. Her 

solitary walks.' aunt then proceeded to examine the simplicity 

And Emily was surprised, when, having in- of her dress, adding, that she expected to see 

formed her aunt that she had been no further her attired with gaiety and taste. After which 

than the gardens, she understood these to be she condescended to show Emily the splendour 

included in the reproof. of her chateau, and to point out the par- 

' I desire you will not walk there again, at ticular beauty, or elegance, which she thought 

so early an hour, unattended,' said Madame distinguished each of her numerous suites of 

Cheron: 'my gardens are very extensive; apartments. She then withdrew to her toilet, 

and a yoimg woman who can make assigna- the throne of her homage, and Emily to her 

tions by moonlight at La Val^e, is not to be chamber, to unpack her books, and to try to 

trusted to her own inclinations elsewhere.' charm her mind by reading, till the hour of 

Emily, CAtremely surprised and shocked, dressing. 

had scarcely power to beg an explanation oif When the company arrived, Emily entered 

these words ; and when she did, her aunt ab- the saloon with an air of timidity which all 

solutely refused to give it ; though, by her her efforts could not overcome, and which 

severe looks and half sentences, she appeared was increased by the consciousness of Madame 

anxious to impress Emily with a belief that Cheron's severe observation. Her mourning 

she was well informed of some degrading cir- dress, the mild dejection of her beautiful 

cumstances of her conduct. Conscious inno- countenance, and the retiring diffidence of 

cence could not prevent a blush from stealing her manner, rendered her a very interesting 

over Emily's cheek ; she trembled, and looked object to many of the company; among 

confusedly, under the bold eye of Madame whom she distinguished Signor Montoni and 

Cheron, who blushed also ; but hers was the his friend Cavigni, the late visitors at M, 

blush of triumph, such as sometimes stains Quesnel's ; who now seemed to converse with 

the countenance of a person congratulating Madame Cheron with the familiarity of old 

himself on the penetration which had taught acquaintance, and she to attend to them with 

him to suspect another, and who loses both particular pleasure. 

pity for the supposed criminal, and indignation This Signor Montoni had an air of con- 

at his guilt, in the gratification of his own vanity, scious superiority, animated by spirit and 

Emily, not doubting that her aunt's mistake strengthened by talents, to which every person 
arose from the having observed her ramble in seemed involuntarily to yield. The quick- 
ie garden on the night preceding her depar- ness of his perceptions was strikingly ex- 
ture from La ValMe, now mentioned the motive pressed on his coimtenance ; yet that coun- 
of it ; at which Madame Cheron smiled con- tenance could submit implicitly to occasion ; 
temptuously, refusing either to accept this ex- and more than once in this day the triumph 
planation, or to give her reasons for refusing of art over nattu*e might have \a?aYw^J«»KV!>s5^ 



C2 THE RiYSTERrES OP VDOLPHO. 

in it. His visage was long, and rather with her eyes fixed on the far distant Pyre- 
narrow ; yet he was called handsome : and it nees, and her thoughts on Valanconrt and 
was, perhaps, the spirit and vigour of his the beloved scenes of Gascony, she would 
soul, sparkling through his features, that play the sweet and melancholy songs of her 
triumphed for him. Emily felt admiration, native province — the popular songs she had 
but not the admiration that leads to esteem ; listened to from her childhood, 
for it was mixed with a degree of fear she One evening, having excused herself from 
knew not exactly wherefore. accompanying her aunt abroad, she thus 

Cavigni was gay and insinuating as for- withdrew to the pavilion, with books and her 

merly ; and though he paid almost incessant lute. It was the mild and beautiful evening 

attention to Madame Cheron, he found some of a sultry day ; and the windows, which 

opportunities of conversing with Emily, to fronted the west, opened upon all the glory of 

whom he directed at first the sallies of his wit, a setting sun. Its rays illuminated, with 

but now and then assumed an air of tender- strong splendour, the cliflfe of the Pyrenees, 

ness, which she observed and shrunk from, and touched their snowy tops with a roseate 

Though she replied but little, the gentleness hue, that remained long after the sun had 

and sweetness of her manners encouraged him sunk below the horizon, and the shades <rf 

to talk ; and she felt relieved when a young lady twilight had stolen over the landscape. Emily 

of the party, who spoke incessantly, obtruded touched the lute with that fine melancholy 

herself on his notice. This lady, who pos- expression which came from her heart The 

sessed all the sprightlincss of a French woman pensive hour, and the scene ; the evening 

with all her coquetry, affected to understand light on the Garonne, that flowed at no 

every subject — or, rather, there was no affocta- great distance, and whose waves as they 

tion in the case ; for, never looking beyond passed towards La Valine, she often viewed 

the limits of her own ignorance, she believed with a sigh — these united circumstances dis- 

she had nothing to learn. She attracted posed her mind to tenderness ; and her 

notice from all— amused some, disgusted thoughts were with Valancourt, of whom she 

others for a moment, and was then forgotten, had heard nothing since her arrival at Thou- 

This day passed without any material louse ; and now that she was removed from 

occurrence ; and Emily, though amused by him, and in uncertainty, she perceived all the 

the characters she had seen, was glad when interest he held in her heart. Befcxe she saw 

slK* could retire to the recollections which had Valancourt, she had never met a mind and 

acqui;'ed with her the character of duties. taste so accordant \vith her o>vn ; and though 

A fortnight passed in a round of dissipa- Madame Cheron told her much of Ae arts di 

tion and company ; and Emily who attended dissimulation, and that the elegance and 

Madame Cheron in all her visits, was some- propriety of thought, which she so much 

limes entertained, but oftener wearied. She admired in her lover, were assumed for the 

was struck by the apparent talents and know- purpose of pleasing her, she could scarcely 

ledge displayed in the various conversations doubt their truth. This possibility, however, 

she listened to ; and it was long before she faint as it was, was sufficient to harass her 

discovered that the talents were, for the most mind with anxiety ; and she found that few 

part, those of imposture, and the knowledge conditions are more painful than that of un- 

nothing more than was necessary to assist certainty as to the merit of a beloved object — 

them. But what deceived her most, was the an uncertainty which she would not have 

air of constant gaiety and good spirits dis- suffered, . had her confidence in her own 

played by every visitor, and which she sup- opinions been greater. 

posed to arise from content as constant, and She was \\'as awakened from her musing by 

from benevolence as ready. At length, from the sound of horses' feet along a road that 

the over-acting of some less accomplished wound under the windows of the pavilion ; 

than the others, she could perceive that, and a gentleman passed on horseback, whose 

though contentment and benevolence are the resemblance to Valancourt, in air and figure 

only sure sources of cheerfulness, the im- (for the twilight did not permit a view of his 

moderate and feverish animation, usually ex- leatures), immediately struck her. She re- 

hibited in large parties, results partly from an tired hastily from the lattice, fearing to be 

insensibility to the cares which benevolence seen, yet wishing to observe further; while the 

iinist sometimes derive from the suflterings of stranger passed on without looking up ; and 

others, and partly from a desire to display when she returned to the lattice, she saw him 

the appearance of that prosperity which they faintly through the twilight, winding under 

know will command submission and attention the high trees that led to Thoulouse. This 

to themselves. little incident so much disturbed her spirits, 

Emily's pleasantest hours were passed in that the temple and its scenery were no longer 

the pavilion of the terrace ; to which she interesting to her, and after walking a while 

retwed, when she could steal from observa- on the terrace she returned to the chateau. 

tjon, with a book to overcome, or a lute to Madame Cheron, whether she had seen a 

indulge, her melancholy. There, as she sal n\a\ SLdmvi^d, \v3.d lost at play, or had wit- 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 63 

ressed an entertainment more splendid than looking out for a good fortune. However, on 

her own, was returned from her visit with a that point he has mistaken his aim.' 

temper more than usually discomposed ; and ' His family was known to my father,' said 

Emily was glad when the hour arrived in Emily modestly, and without appearing to be 

which she could retire to the solitude of her sensible of the last sentence. 

own apartment. ' O ! that is no recommendation at all,' re- 

On the following morning she was sum- plied her aunt, with her usual readiness upon 

rooned to Madame Cheron, whose counten- this topic ; ' he took such strange fancies to 

ance was inflamed with resentment ; and as people. He was always judging persons by 

Emily advanced, she held out a letter to their countenances, and was continually de- 

her. ceived.' 

' Do you know this hand ?' said she, ha a ' Yet it was but now, Madam, that you 
severe tone, and with a look that was intended . judged me guilty by my countenance,' said 

to search her heart ; while Emily examined Emily, with a design of reproving Madame 

the letter attentively, and assured her that she Cheron, to which she was induced % this dis- 

did not. respectful mention of her father. 

' Do not provoke me,' said her aunt : 'you 'I called you here,' resumed her aunt 

do know it : confess the truth immediately, colouring, * to tell you that I will not be dis- 

I insist upon your confessing the truth in- turbed, in my own house, by any letters or 

stantly.' visits from young men who may take a fancy 

Emily was silent, and turned to leave the to flatter you. This M. de Valantine — I 

room ; but Madame called her back. think you call him — has the impertinence to 

• Oh ! you are guilty, then !' said she : ' you beg I will permit him to pay his respects to 
do know the hand !' me ! I shall send him a proper answer. And 

• If you were before in doubt of this, for you, Emily, I repeat it once for all — if you 
Madam,' replied Emily, calmly, 'why did are not contented to conform to my directions, 
you accuse me of having told a falsehood ?* and to my way of life, I shall give up the task 

Madame Cheron did not blush ; but her of overlooking your conduct — I shall no longer 

fiieoe did, a moment after, when she heard the trouble myseS" with )rour education, but shall 

name of Valancourt. It was not, however, send you to board in a convent.' 

with the consciousness of deserving reproof ; * Dear Madame,' said Emily, blunting into 

few, if she had ever seen his hand-writing, the tears and overcome by the rude suspicions her 

present characters did not bring it to her re- aunt had expressed, ' how have I deserved 

collection. these reproofs ?* She could say no more ; and 

'It is useless to deny it,* said Madame so very fearful was she of acting with any 

Cheron ; • 1 see in your countenance that you degree of impropriety in the aftair itself, that, 

are no stranger to this letter ; and I dare say at the present moment, Madame Cheron 

you have received many such from this imper- might perhaps have prevailed with her to bind 

tinent young man, without my knowledge, in herself by a promise to renounce Valancourt 

toy own house. ' for ever. Her mind, weakened by her terrors, 

- Emily, shocked at the indelicacy of this ac- would no longer sufter her to view him as she 

ousation stiU more than by the vulgarity of had formerly done ; she feared the terror of her 

VMt fonner, instantly forgot the pride that had own judgment, not that of Madame Cheron ; 

imposed silence, and endeavoured to vindicate and feared also that, in her former conversa- 

berself from the aspersion ; but Madame tion with him at La Vall^, she had not con- 

Cheron was not to be convinced. ducted herself with sufficient reserve. She knew 

• I cannot suppose,^ she resumed, ' that that she did not deserve the coarse suspicions 
this young man would have taken the liberty which her aunt had thrown out ; but a thou- 
of writing to me, if you had not encouraged sand scruples rose to torment her, such as 
him to do so ; and I must now—' would never have disturbed the peace of 

• You will allow me to remind you. Madam,' Madame Cheron. Thus rendered anxious to 
said Emily timidly, ' of some particulars of a avoid every opportunity of erring, and willing 
conversation we had at La Valine. I then to submit to any restrictions that her auiit 
told you truly, that I had only not forbidden should think proper, she expressed an obedi- 
Monsieur Valancourt from addressing my ence ; to which Madame Cheron did not give 
£amily.' much confidence, and which she seemed to 

• I will not be interrupted,' said Madame consider as the consequence of either fear or 
Cheron, interrupting her niece : ' I was going artifice. 

to say — I — I — I have forgot what I was going • Well then,' said she, 'promise me that 

to say. — But how happened it that you did you will neither see this young man, nor write 

not forbid him?' Emily was silent. 'How to him, without my consent.' 

happened it that you encouraged him to ' Dear Madam,' replied Emily, ' can you 

trouble me with this letter? — A young man suppose I would do either, unknown to 

that nobody knows — an utter stranger in the you?* 

place — a young adventxurer, no doubt, who is * I don't kao^ "^\i3aX \g ^\i.v^QR^» 'XN^kw. >s» 



64 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



no knowing how young women will act. It is 
difficult to place any confidence in them, for 
they have seldom sense enough to wish for the 
respect of the world. 

'Alas ! Madam,' said Emily, 'I am anxious 
for my own respect ; my father taught me the 
value of that ; he said, if I dcser\ed my own 
esteem, that of the world would follow of 
course. ' 

' My brother was a good kind of a man,' 
replied Madame Cheron, 'but he did not 
know the world. I am sure I have always 

felt a proper respect for myself ; yet ' She 

stopped ; but she might have added, ' that 
the world had not always shown respect to 
her ; and this without impeaching its judg- 
ment. 

' Well !' resumed Madame Cheron, ' you 
have not given me the promise, though, that I 
demand.' 

Emily readily gave it ; and being then suf- 
fered to withdraw, she walked into the garden : 
tried to compKJse her spirits ; and at length 
arrived at her favourite pavilion at the end of 
the terrace, where, seating herself at one 
of the embowered \vindows that opened upon 
a balcony, the stillness and seclusion of the 
scene allowed her to recollect her thoughts, 
and to arrange them so as to form a clearer 
judgment of licr former conduct. She endea- 
voured to review with exactness all the par- 
ticulars of her conversation with Valancourt 
at La Valee ; had the satisfaction to observe 
nothing that could alarm her delicate pride, 
and thus to be confirmed in the self-esteem 
which was so necessary to her peace. Her 
mind then became tranquil ; and she saw 
Valancourt amiable and intelligent as he had 
formerly app>eared, and Madame Cheron 
neither the one nor the other. The remem- 
brance of her lover, however, brought with 
it many very painful emotions, for it by no 
means reconciled her to the thought of resign- 
ing him ; and Madame Cheron having already 
shown how highly she disapproved of the 
attachment, she foresaw much suffering from 
the opposition of interests : yet with all this 
was mingled a degree of delight, which, in 
spite of reason, partook of hope. She deter- 
mined, however, that no consideration should 
induce her to permit a clandestine corre- 
spondence, and to observe in her conversation 
with Valancourt, should they ever meet again, 
the same nicety of re5er\'e which had hitherto 
marked her conduct. As she repeated the 
words — should we ever meet again ! she shrunk, 
as if this was a circumstance which had never 
before occurred to her, and tears came to her 
eyes ; which she hastily dried, for she heard 
footsteps approaching, and then the door of 
the pavilion open, and, on turning, she saw — 
Valancourt. 

An emotion of mingled pleasure, surprise, 
and apprehension pressed so suddenly upon 
her heart as almost to overcome her spirits : 



the colour left her cheeks ; tben letnmed 
brighter than befcnre; and she "was for a 
moment unable to speak, or to rise from her 
chair. His countenance was the mirror in 
which she saw her own emotions reflected, and 
it roused her to self-command. The joy 
which had animated his features when he 
entered the pavilion, was suddenly repressed, 
as approaching he perceived her agitation, 
and in a tremulous voice inquired ^ter h&c 
health. Recovered from her first surprise, 
she answered him with a tempered smile ; but 
a variety of opposite emotions still assadled 
her heart, and struggled to subdue the mild 
dignity of her manner. It was difficult to 
tell which predominated — the joy of seeing 
Valancourt, or the terror of her aunt's dis- 
pleasure when she should hear of- this meet- 
ing. After some short and embarrassed con- 
x-ersation, she led him into the gardens, and 
inquired if he had seen Madame Cheron. 
' No,' said he, ' I have not yet seen her, for 
they told me, she was engaged ; and as soon 
as I learned that you were in the gardens I 
came hither.' He paused a moment in great 
agitation, and then added — 'Ma^ I venture 
to tell you the purport of nay visit without 
incurring your displeasiu^, and to hope that 
you will not accuse me of precipitation in now 
availing myself of the permission you once 
gave me of addressing your fanodly r Emfly. 
who knew not what to reply, was spared from 
further perplexity, and was sensiUe only of 
fear, when on raising her eyes, she saw Ma- 
dame Cheron turn into the avenue. As the 
consciousness of innocence returned this fear 
was so far dissipated as to permit her to 
appear tranquil ; and instead of avoiding he^ 
aunt, she advanced with Vakmcourt to meet 
her. The look of haughty and impatient 
displeasure with which Madame Cheron re- 
garded them, made Emily shrink ; who under- 
stood, from a single glance, that this meeting 
was believed to have been more than acci- 
dental. Having mentioned Valancourt's name, 
she became again too much agitated to re- 
main with them, and returned into the 
chateau ; where she awaited long in a state 
of trembling anxiety the conclusion of the con- 
ference. She knew not how to account for 
Valancourt's visit to her aunt before he had re- 
ceived the permission he solicited, since she was 
ignorant of a circumstance which would have 
rendered the request useless, even if Madame 
Cheron had been inclined to grant it. Valan- 
court, in the agitation of his spirits, had for- 
gotten to date his letter ; so that it was impos- 
sible for Madame Cheron to return an answer I 
and when we recollected this circumstance, he 
was perhaps not so sorry for the omission, as 
glad of the excuse it allowed him for waiting 
on her before she could send a refusaL 

Madame Cheron had a long conversation 
with Valancourt ; and when she returned to 
the chateau, her countenance expressed iU* 



THE MVSTERIBS OF VDOLPHO, 



«S 



humour, but not the degree of severity which 
Emily had apprehended. ' I have dismissed 
this young man at last,' said she; 'and I hope 
my house will never again be disturbed with 
similar visits. He assures me that your inter- 
view was not preconcerted.' — ' Dear Madam !' 
said Emily in extreme emotion, 'you surely 
did not ask him the question ?' 

* Most certainly I did : you could not sup- 
pose I should be so imprudent as to neglect 
it.' 

' Good God I' exclaimed Emily, ' what an 
opinion must he form of me, since you, 
Madam, could express a suspicion of such ill 
conduct r 

*It is of very little consequence what 
opinion he may form of you,' replied her 
aunt, 'for I have put an end to the affair; 
but I believe he will not form a worse opinion 
of me for my prudent conduct. I letTiim see 
that I was not to be trifled with, and that I had 
more delicacy than to permit any clandes- 
tine correspondence to be carried on in my 
house.' 

Emily had frequently heard Madame 
Cheron use the word delicacy ; but she was 
now more than usually perplexed to imder- 
sland how she meant to apply it in this 
instance, in which her whole conduct appeared 
to merit the very reverse of the term. 

' It was very inconsiderate of my brother,* 
resumed ' Madame Cheron, ' to leave the 
trouble of overlooking your conduct to me. 
I wish you were well settled in life. But if I 
find that I am to be further troubled with 
^ch visitors as this M. Valancourt, I shall 
place you in a convent at once : so remember 
the alternative. This young man has the 
impertinence to own to me — he owns it! — 
that his fortune is very small, and that he is 
chiefly dependent on an elder brother and on 
the profession he has chosen ! He should 
have concealed these circumstances, at least, 
if he expected to succeed with me. Had he 
the presumption to suppose I would marry 
my niece to a person such as he describes 
himself?* 

Emily dried her tears when she heard of 
the candid confession of Valancourt ; and 
though the circumstances it discovered were 
afflicting to her hopes, his artless conduct 
gave her a d^;ree of pleasure that overcame 
every other emotion. But she was compelled, 
eiven thus early in life, to observe, that good 
sense and noble integrity are not always suffi- 
cient to cope with folly and narrow cunning ; 
smd her heart was pure enough to allow her, 
even at this trying moment, to look with more 
pride on the defeat of the former, than with 
mortification on the conquests of the latter. 

Madame Cheron pursued her triumph — ' He 
has also thought proper to tell me, that he 
will receive his dismission from no person but 
yourself. This favour, however, I have ab- 
solutely refused him : he shall learn, that it is 



quite sufficient that I disapprove him. And i 
take this opportunity of repeating, — that, if 
you concert any means of interview un- 
known to me, you shall leave my house 
immediately. ' 

' How little do you know me, madam, that 
you should think such an injunction neces- 
sary I' said Emily, trying to suppress her 
emotion ; * how littie of the deaifiarents who 
educated me I' 

Madame Cheron now went to dress for an 
engagement which she had made for the 
evening ; and Emily, who would gladly have 
been excused from attending her aunt, did 
not ask to remain at home, lest her request 
should be attributed to an improper motive. 
When she retired to her own room, the 
little fortitude which had supported her in 
the presence of her relation, forsook her ; she 
remembered only that Valancourt, whose 
character appeared more amiable from 
every circumstance that unfolded it, was 
banished from her presence — perhaps for 
ever! — and she passed the time in weeping, 
which, according to her aunt's direction, she 
ought to have employed in dressing. This 
important duty was> however, quickly dis- 
patched ; though, when she joined Madame 
Cheron at table, her eyes betrayed that she 
had been in tears, and drew upon her a 
severe reproof. 

Her efforts to appear cheerful did not en- 
tirely fail, when she joined the company at 
the house of Madame Clairval, an elderly 
widow lady, who had lately come to reside at 
Thoulouse on an estate of her late husband. 
She had lived many years at Paris in a splen- 
did style ; had naturally a gay temper ; and, 
since her residence at Thoulouse, had given 
some of the most magnificent entertainments 
that had been seen in that neighbourhood. 

These excited not only the envy, but the 
trifling ambition of Madame Cheron ; who; 
since she could not rival the splendour of her 
festivities, was desirous of being ranked in the 
number of her most intimate friends. For this 
purpose she paid her the most obsequioui at- 
tention, and made a point of being disengaged 
whenever she received an invitation from 
Madame Clairval ; of whom she talked 
wherever she went, and derived much self- 
consequence from impressing a belief on her 
general acquaintance, that they were on the 
most familiar footing. 

The entertainments of this evening con- 
sisted of a ball and supper ; it was a fancy 
ball : and the company danced in groups in 
the gardens, which were very extensive. The 
high and luxuriant trees under which the 
groups assembled, were illuminated with a 
profusion of lamps, disposed with taste and 
fancy. The gay and various dresses of the 
company (some of whom were seated on the 
turf, conversing at their ease, observing the 
cotillons, taking refreshtnsu.ts» ^.tA •i»cs«NSi'C^ss>£s» 



66 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



loiicliinff sportively a j^iilnr) ; the gallant 
manners of tin; j;onl1einen ; iho cxciuisitcly 
capricious ;iir of llie ladies ; the li^lit fantastic 
steps of their dances ; the nuisicions, with the 
lute, the hautboy, nnd the tabor, ^<.aU.'J at tlic 
foot of an ehii ; and the sylvan secnery of 
woods around ; were circumstances that 
unitedly formed a characteristic and striking 
picture of French, festivity. Emily surveyed 
tlie gaiety of the scene with a melancholy kind 
of pleasure ; and her emotion may be imag- 
ined, when, as she stood with her aunt looking 
at one of the groups, she perceived Valancourt 
— saw him dancing with a young and beautiful 
lady — saw him conversing with her with a 
mixture of attention and familiarity such as 
she had seldom observed in his manner. She 
turned hastily from the scene, and attempted 
to draw away Madame Cheron, who was con- 
versing with Signer Cavigni, and neither per- 
ceived Valancourt, nor was willing to be 
interrupted. A faintness suddenly came over 
Emily, and, unable to support herself, she sat 
down on a turf bank beneath the trees, where 
several other persons were sealed. One of 
these, obser\'ing the extreme paleness of her 
countenance, inquired if she was ill, and 
begged she would allow him to fetch her a 
glass of water ; for which politeness she 
thanked him, but did not accept it. Her 
apprehension lest Valancourt should obser\'e 
her emotion, made her anxious to overcome 
it ; and she succeeded so far as to recomjDose 
her countenance. Madame Cheron was still 
conversing with Cavigni ; and the Count 
Bauvillers, who had addressed Emily, made 
some observations upon the scene, to which 
she answered almost unconsciously ; for her 
mind was still occupied with the idea of 
Valancourt, to whom it was with extreme un- 
easiness that she remained so near. Some 
remarks, however, which the count made upon 
the dance, obliged her to turn her eyes to- 
wards it, and at that moment Valancourt's 
met hers. Her colour faded again ; she felt 
that she was relapsing into faintness, and in- 
stantly averted her looks, but not before she 
had observed the altered countenance of 
Valancourt on perceiving her. She would 
have left the spot immediately, had she not 
been conscious that this conduct would have 
shown him more obviously the interest he 
held in her heart ; and having tried to attend 
to the count's conversation, and to join in it, 
she at length recovered her spirits. But when 
he made some obscr\'ations on Valancourt's 
partner, the fear of showing that she was in- 
terested in the remark would have betrayed it 
to him, had not the count, while he spoke, 
looked towards the person of whom he was 
speaking. 'The lady,' said he, 'dancmg with 
that young chevalier, who appears to be 
accomplished in every thing but in dancing, is 
ranked among the beauties of Thoulouse. 
She is handsome, and her fortune wiU be very 



large. I hope she will make a better choice 
in a partner for life than she has done in a 
partner for the danoe; for I obsenre he 
has just put the set into ^r^^eat confusioD-te 
does nothing but commit blundo^. I am 
surprised that, with lu> air and Ggure, he has 
not taken more care to accompli^ himself in 
dancing. ' 

Emily, whose heart trantbled at every word 
that was now uttered, endeavoured to turn the 
conversation from Valancourt, bv inquiring 
the name of the lady with whom he danced ; 
but before the count could reply, the dance 
concluded; and Emily, perceiving that Valan- 
court was coming towards her, rose, and 
joined Madame CnenxL 

' Here is the Chevalier Valancourt, madam,* 
said she in a whisper, ' pray let us go.' Her 
aunt immediately moved on, bat not before 
Valancourt had reached them; who bowed 
lowly to Madame Cheron, and with an eannat 
and dejected look to Emily ; with whom, not- 
withstanding all her effort, an air oC mate than 
common reserve prevailed. The fvesenoe of 
Madam Cheron prevented Valancourt firam 
remaining, and he passed on with a counte- 
nance whose melancholy reproadied her for 
having increased it. Emily was called ficom 
the musing fit into which she bad feUen, by 
the Count Bauvillers, who was known to her 
aimt. 

' I have your pardon to b^, Ma'amseDe,' 
said he, ' for a rudeness which yon wiH readily 
believe was quite unintentionaL I did not 
know that the chevalier was your acqnaini^ 
ance when I so freely criticised bis dancing.' 

Emily blushed, and smfled ; and Madame 
Cheron spared h&r the difficult of replying. 

'If you mean the person who has jaA 
passed us,' said she, ' I can assm« you he is 
no acquaintance of either mine or Ma'amaeOs 
St. Aubert's : I know nothing of him.* 

' O ! that is the Chevalier Valancourt,' Mid 
Cavigni carelessly, and looking back. 

'You know him, then?* said Madame 
Cheron. 

'I am not acquainted with him,* replied 
Cavigni. ' You don't know, then, the reason 
I have to call him impertinent : — be has had 
the presumption to admire my nieoe 1' 

• If every man deserves the title of imper* 
tinent who admires Ma'amseUe St Aubert,' 
replied Cavigni, 'I fear there are a great 
many impertinents, and I am wiUinff to ac- 
knowledge myself one of the number? 

' O Signor !' said Madame Cheron with an 
affected smile, ' I perceive you have learnt the 
art of complimenting since you came to 
France. But it is cruel to compliment chil- 
dren, since they mistake flattery for truth.* 

Cavigni ttuned away his face for a moment, 
and then said with a studied air, 'Whom, then, 
are we to compliment. Madam ? — ^for it wcndd 
be absm-d to compliment a woman of refinod 
tmderstanding : sAc is above all praise.* 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



67 



As he finished this sentence, he gave Emily 
a sly look, and the smile that had lurked in his 
eye stole forth. She perfectly understood it, 
and blushed for Madame Cheron ; who re- 
plied, — 

• You are perfectly right, Signor ; no woman 
of understanding can endure compliment.' 

•I have heard Signor Montoni say,' re- 
joined Cavigni, ' that he never knew but one 
w6man who deserved it.' 

• Well ! exclaimed Madame Cheron with a 
short laugh, and a smile of unutterable com- 
placency ; and who could she be ?' 

•O! replied Cavigni,' it is impossible to 
mistake her ; ' for certainly there is not more 
tH^ one woman in the world who has both 
the merit to deserve compliment and the wit 
to refuse it : most women reverse the cast 
entirely.* 

He looked again at Emily, who again blushed 
deeper than before for her aunt, and tiuned 
from him with displeasure. 

• Well, Signor I' said Madame Cheron ; ' I 
firotest you are a Frenchman ; I never heard 
a foreigner say anything half so gallant as 
tbatr 

•Tlrufc, Madam,' said the Count, who had 
been some time silent, and with a low bow ; 
'but the gallantry of the compliment had 
been utterly lost, but for the ingenuity that 
discovered the application.' 

Madame Cheron did not perceive the 
meaning of this too satirical sentence, and 
she therefore escaped the pain which Emily 
felt on her account. 

• O ! here comes Signor Montoni himself,' 
fcaid her aunt ; ' I protest I will tell him all 
the fine things you have been sajang to me.' 
The Signor, however, passed at this moment 
into another waSc ' Pray, who is it that has 
10 much engaged your friend this evening?' 
asked Madame Cheron, with an air of cha- 
grin ; 'I have not seen him once.' 

' He had a very particular engagement 
with the Marquis la Riviere,' replied Cavigni, 
* which has detained him, I perceive, till this 
moment, or he would have done himself the 
hcmour of paying his respects to you. Madam, 
sooner, as he commissioned me to say. But, 
I know not how it is — ^your conversation is so 
fescinating, that it can charm even memory, I 
think ; or I should certainly have delivered 
my friend's apology before.' 

• The apology, sir, wotdd have been more 
satisfactoty from himself,' said Madame 
Cheron ; whose vanity was more morti- 
fied by Montoni's neglect than flattered by 
Cavigni's compliment. Her manner at this 
moment, and Cavigni's late conversation, now 
awakened a suspicion in Emily's mind, which, 
notwithstanding that some recollections served 
to confirm it, appeared preposterous. She 
thought she perceived that Montoni was pay- 
ing serious addresses to her aunt, and that 
tbe not only accepted them, but was jealously 



watchful of any appearance of neglect on his 
part. — That Madame Cheron, at her years, 
should elect a second husband, was ridiculous, 
though her vanity made it not impossible ; but 
Montoni, with his discernment, his figure, 
and pi^tensions, should make choice of 
Madame Cheron, appeared most wonderful. 
Her thoughts, however, did not dwell long 
on the subject — nearer interest pressed upon 
them : Valancourt rejected of her aunt, and 
Valancourt dancing with a gay and beautiftd 
partner, alternately tormented her mind. As 
she passed along the gardens, she looked 
timidly forward, half fearing and half hoping 
that he might appear in the crowd ; and the 
disappointment she felt on not seeing him, 
told her that she had hoped more than she 
had feared. 

Montoni soon after joined the party. He 
muttered over some short speech about regret 
for having been so long detained elsewhere, 
when he knew he should have the pleasure of 
seeing Madame Cheron here : and she, re- 
ceiving the apology with the air of a pettish 
girl, addressed herself entirely to Cavigni, 
who looked archly at Montoni, as if he would 
have said, ' I will not triumph over you too 
much — I will have the goodness to bear my 
honours meekly ; but look sharp, Signor, or I 
shall certainly run away with your prize.' 

The supper was served in different pavilions 
in the gardens, as well as in one large saloon 
of the chateau, and with more of taste than 
either of splendour or even of plenty. Ma- 
dame Cheron and her party supped with 
Madame Clairval in the saloon ; and Emily 
with difficulty disguised her emotion, when 
she saw Valancourt placed at the same table 
with herself. There Madame Cheron, having 
surveyed him with high displeasure, said to 
some person who sat next to her, ' Pray, who 
is that young man ? — ' 

' It is the Chevalier Valancoiut,' was the 
answer. 

' Yes ; I am not ignorant of his name ; but 
who is this Chevalier Valancourt, that thus 
intrudes himself at this table?' 

The attention of the person to whom she 
spoke was called off before she received a 
second reply. The table at which they sat 
was very long ; and Valancourt being seated, 
with his partner, near the bottom, and Emily 
near the top, the distance between them may 
account for his not immediately perceiving 
her. She avoided looking to that end of the 
table ; but whenever her eyes happened to 
glance towards it, she observed him con- 
versing with his beautiful, companion ; and 
the observation did not contribute to restore 
her peace, any more than the accounts she 
heard of the fortune and accomplishments of 
this same lady. 

Madame Cheron, to whom these remarks 
were sometimes addressed, because they sup- 
ported topics fOI U\N\5X W2PCNVSL^a.>L\Q^^ 'iRSJSS^.^ 



68 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



indefatigable in her attempts to deprecate 
Valancourt ; towards whom she felt all the 
petty rescnlmeiit of a narrow pride. ' I admire 
the lady,' said she, 'but I must condemn her 
choice of a partner.'— 'Oh, the Chevalier Va- 
lancourt is one of the most accomplished 
young men we have,' replied the lady to 
whom this remark was addressed. ' It is 
whispered that Mademoiselle d' Emery and 
her large fortune are to be his.' 

• Impossible I' exclaimed Madame Cheron, 
reddening with vexation ; ' it is impossible 
that she can be so destitute of taste ; he has 
so little the air of a person of condition, that, 
if I did not sec him at the table of Madame 
Clairval, I should never have suspected him 
to be one. I have, besides, particular reasons 
for belie\'ing the report to be erroneous.' 

• I cannot doubt the truth of it,' replied the 
lady gravely, disgusted by the abrupt contra- 
diction she had received concerning her 
opinion of Valancourt's merit. 

' You will not, perhaps, doubt it,' said 
Madame Cheron, when I assure you that it 
was only this morning that I rejected his 
suit.' 

This was said ^vithout any intention of im- 
posing the meaning it conveyed, but simply 
from a habit of considering herself to be the 
most important person in every affair that 
concerned her niece, and because, literally, 
she had rejected Valancourt. 

• Your reasons are indeed such as cannot 
be doubted,' replied the lady with an ironical 
smile. 

'Any more than the discernment of the 
Chevalier Valancourt,' added Cavigni, who 
stood by the chair of Madame Cheron, and 
had heard her arrogate to herself, as he 
thought, a distinction which had been paid to 
her niece. 

' His discernment may be justly questioned, 
sign or,' said Madame Cheron ; who was not 
flattered by what she understood to be an en- 
comium on Emily. 

' Alas !' exclaimed Cavigni, surveying 
Madame Cheron with affected ecstasy, ' how 
vain is that assertion, while that face — that 
shape — that air — combine to refute it ! Un- 
happy Valancourt ! his discernment has been 
his destruction.' 

Emily looked surprised and embarrassed : 
the lady who had lately spoken, astonished ; 
and Madame Cheron, who, though she did 
not perfectly understand this speech, was very 
ready to believe herself complimented by it, 
said, smilingly, ' O Signor, you are very 
gallant : but those who hear you vindicate 
the chevalier's discernment, will suppose that 
I am the object of it.' 

'They cannot doubt it', rephed Cavigni, 
bowing low. 

' And would not that be very mortifying, 
signor ?' 

' Unquestionably it would,* said Cavi§w» 



• I cannot endure the thought/ said Madame 
Cheron. 

' It is not to be endured/ replied CavignL 

' What can be done to prevent so humili- 
ating a mistake?* rejoined Madame Cheron. 

' Alas ! I cannot assist you/ replied Cavigni 
with a deliberating air. ' Your only chance 
of refuting the calumny, and of making 
people understand what you wish them to 
believe, is to persist in yonr first assertion ; 
for, when they are told of the chevalier's 
want of discernment, it is possible they may 
suppose he never presumed to distress jrou 
with his admiration. But then again, that 
diffidence, which renders you so insensible to 
your own perfections, they will consider thii ; 
and Valancourt's taste wul not be doubted, 
though you arraign it. In short, they will, 
in spite of your endeavouis, continue to 
believe, what might very naturally have 
occurred to them without any hint olf mine, 
that the chevalier has taste enough to admirs 
a beautiful woman.' 

' All this is very distressing I' said Madams 
Cheron, with a profound sigh. 

' May I be allowed to ask what is so distress- 
ing ?' said Madame Clairval, who was strudc 
with the rueful countenance and doleful accent 
with which this was delivoiYsd. 

' It is a delicate subject,' replied Madame 
Cheron ; a very mortifying one to me. ' 

' I am concerned to hear it,' said Madame 
Clairval. ' I hope nothing has occurred, ^ 
evening, particularly to distress vou?* 

' Alas, yes ! within this half-hour ; and I 
know not where the report may end. My 
pride was never so shocked before. Bat I 
assure you the report is totally void of founda- 
tion.' 

' Good God !' exclaimed Madame Clairval, 
* what can be done ? Can you point out any 
way by which I can assist or console you ?* 

' The only way by which you can do either,* 
replied Madame Cheron, * is to contradict the 
report wherever you go. ' 

' Well 1 but pray inform me what I am to 
contradict.' 

' It is so very humiliating, that I know not 
how to mention it,' continued Madame 
Cheron : ' but you shall judge. Do you ob- 
serve that young man seated near the bottom 
of the table, who is conversing with Made- 
moiselle d'Emery?* 

• Yes ; I perceive whom you mean.' 

• You observe how Uttle he has the air of a 
person of condition ? I was saying, just now, 
that I should not have thought hmi a gentle- 
man, if I had not seen him at this table.' 

' Well ! but the report,' said Madame Clair- 
val ; ' let me understand the subject of yoiv 
distress.' 

' Ah ! the subject of my distress I' replied 
Madame Cheron : ' this person whom nobody 
knows (I beg pardon, madam, I did not con- 
%\d(ii: vi\va.t. I ^d), this impertinent young 



THE MYSTEKIES OF UDOLPHO, 69 

man, having had the presumption to address eluded with declaring that he would accept his 
my niece, has, I fear, given rise to a report dismissionfrom Emily only, and with entreating 
that he had declared himself my admirer, that she would allow him to wait upon her on the 
Now, only consider how very mortifying such approaching evening. When she read this 
a report must be ! You, I know, will feel for she was astonished at the moderation of Ma- 
my situation. A woman of my condition! dame Cheron, and looked at her with expecta- 
Think how degrading even the rumour of tion as she said sorrowfully, — * What am I to 
such an alliance must be 1' say Madame ? ' 

' Degrading indeed ! my poor friend,' said ' Why — ^we must see the young man, I 
Madame Clairval. ' You may rely upon it, I believe,' replied her aunt, ' and hear what he 
will contradict the report wherever I go.' As has further to say for himself. You may tell 
she said this, she turned her attention upon him he may come.' Enuly dared scarcely 
another part of the company ; and Cavigni, credit what she heard. *Yet stay,' added 
who had hitherto appeared a grave spectator Madame Cheron ; * I will tell him so myself.' 
of the scene, now fearing he should be unable She called for pen and ink ; Emily still not 
to smother the laugh that convulsed him, daring to trust the emotions she felt, and 
walked abruptly away. almost sinking beneath them. Her surprise 

' I perceive you do not know,' said the lady would have been less, had she overheard, on 
who sat near Madame Cheron, • that the the preceding evening, what Madame Cheron 
gentleman you have been speaking of is had not forgotten — that . Valancourt was the 
Madame Clairval's nephew !' nephew of Madame Clairval. 

. * Impossible !' exclaimed Madame Cheron ; What were the particulars of her aunt's 
who now began to perceive that she had been note Emily did not learn, but the result was 
totally mistaken in her judgment of Valan- a visit from Valancourt in the evening ; whom 
court, and to praise him aloud, with as much Madame Cheron received alone ; and they 
servility as she had before censured him with had a long conversation before Emily was 
frivolous malignity. called down. When she entered the room, 

Emily, who during the greater part of this her aunt was conversing with complacency, 
conversation had been so absorbed in thought and she saw the eyes of Valancourt, as he 
as to be spared the pain of hearing it, was impatiently rose, animated with hope. 
now extremely surprised by her aunt's praise ' We have been talking over this aifair/ 
of Valancourt, with whose relationship to said Madame Cheron. ' The chevalier has 
Madame Clairval she was unacquainted ; but been telling me, that the late Monsieur 
she was not sorry when Madame Cheron (who Clairval was the brother of the Countess de 
though she now tried to appear unconcerned, Duvamey, his mother. I only wish he had 
was really much embarrassed) prepared to mentioned his relationship to Madame Clair- 
withdraw, immediately after supper. Mon- val before : I certainly should have considered 
toni then came to hand Madame Cheron to that circumstance as a sufficient introduction 
her carriage, and Cavigni, with an arch to my house. Valancourt bowed, and was 
solemnity of countenance, followed with going to address Emily, but her aunt pre- 
Emily ; who, as she wished them good-night, vented him. I have, therefore, consented that 
and drew up the glass, saw Valancourt among )'ou shall receive his visits ; and though I will 
the crowd at the gates. Before the carriage not bind myself by any promise, or say that 
drove off, he disappeared. Madame Cheron I shall consider him as my nephew, yet I 
forbore to mention him to Emily ; and as shall permit the intercourse, and shall look 
soon as they reached the chateau, they sepa- forward to any further connection as an event 
rated for the night. which may possibly take place in a course of 

On the following morning, as Emily sat at years, provided the chevalier rises in his pro- 
breakfast with her aunt, a letter was brought fession, or any circumstance occurs which 
to her, of which she knew the hand-writing may make it prudent for him to take a wife, 
upon the cover ; and as she received it with a But M. Valancourt will observe, and you too, 
trembling hand, Madame Cheron hastily in- Emily, that, till that happens, I positively 
quired from whom it came. Emily, with her forbid any thoughts of marrying.' 
leave, broke the seal, and observing the signa- Emily's countenance, during this coarse 
ture of Valancourt, gave it, unread, to her speech, varied every instant, and towards its 
aunt, who received it with impatience ; and conclusion her distress had so much increased 
as she looked it over, Emily endeavoured to that she was on the point of leaving the 
read on her countenance its contents. Having room. Valancourt meanwhile, scarcely less 
returned the letter to her niece, whose eyes embarrassed, did not dare to look at her for 
asked if she might examine it, ' Yes, read it, whom she was thus distressed ; but when 
child,' said Madame Cheron in a manner less Madame Cheron was silent, he said—-' Flatter- 
severe than she had expected ; and Emily ing, Madam, as your approbation is to me — 
had, perhaps, never before so willingly obeyed highly as I am honoured by it — I have yet so 
her aunt. In this letter Valancourt said little of much to fear, that I scarcely d'ax^NRkV's^^R:* — 
the interview of the preceding day, but con- 'Pray, svt» e^L^Vam '^Qva'5»^l> ^«^^'Vw'^S»ssx^ 



yo THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 

Cheron--fln unexpected requisition, which as when she had so precipitately foiUdden it : 

embarrassed \'alnncourt again, and almost for though she herself possessed the means of 

overcamehimwitliconfusion, at circumstances, rendering this union not only certain, bat 

on which, had he been only a spectator of the prudent, yet to do so was no port of her pte- 

scene, he would have smiled. sent intention. 

•Till I receive Mademoiselle St. Aubcrt's From this period Valanconrt made frequent 

permission to accept your indulgence,' said he, visits to Madame Cheron, and Emily passed 

fttitcringly — ' till she allows meto hope — ' in his r.ocicty the happiest hours she had 

•Ol is that all?' inlerrupled Madame known .since the death of her father. They 

Cheron. 'Well, I will take upon me to were both too much engaged by the present 

answer for her. But, at the same time, fir, moments to give serious consideration to the 

give me leave to ob.ser\c to you, that I aml-.cr future. They loved and were beloved, and 

guardian, and that I expect, in every instance, saw not tiiat the very attachment which formed 

that my will is hers.' tlu deli:;ht of their present days might pos- 

As she said this, she rose and quilled llic sibly occasion the suflTerings of years. Mean- 
room, leaving Emily and X^olaneourt in a while, Madame Cheron*s intercourse with 
state of mutual embarrassment ; and when Madame Claii-val became more frequent than 
Valancourt's hopes enabled him to overcome before, and her vanity was already gratified 
his fears, and to address her witli the zeal and by the opportunity of proclaiming, wherever 
sincerity so natural to him, it was a consider- she went, the attachment that suAisisted be- 
able time l)efore she was sufficiently recovered tween their nephew and niece, 
to hear with dislinclness his solicitations and Montoni was now also become a daily guest 
inquiries. at the chateau, and Emily was compiled to 

'I'he conduct of Madame Cheron in this obser\c that he really was a suitor, and a 

affair had bt*en entirely governed by selfish favoured suitor, to her aunt. 

vanity. Valancourt, in his first interview, had. Thus passed the winter months, not only in 

with great candour, laid open to her the true peace, but in happiness, to Valancourt and 

state of his present circumstances and his Emily ; the station of his regiment being so 

future expectancies, and she, with more ])ni- near Tlioulousc iis to allow this frequent inter- 

dence than humanity, had absolutely and course. The pavilion on the terrace was the 

abruptly refused his suit. She wished her favourite scene of their intcr\'iews, and there 

niece to marry ambitiously ; not because she Emily with Madame Cheron would work, 

desired to see her in possesr ion of the hap- while Valancourt read aloud worics of 

Eincss which rank and wealth arc usually bo- genius and taste, listened to her enthusiasm, 

eved to bestow, but because she desired to expressed his own, and caught new opportu- 

partake the importance which such an alliance nitjos of ob. serving tliat their minds were 

would give. Wlien, therefore, she discovered formed to con.stitute the happiness of each 

that Valancourt was the nephe\v of a person olhor ; the same taste, the same noble and 

of so much consequence as Madame Clair\al, benevulout sculinients, animalins^ each. 
she became anxious for the connexion, since 

the prospect it afltorded of future fortune and _^. 
distinction for Emily, promised the exaltation 

she coveted for herself. Her calculations .-« a rkn^r-o vt^t 

concerning fortune, in this alliance, were CHAPIER XIV. 

guided rather by her wislics than by any hint * A.s when a .«;hepherd of the IlcbriJ-lsIcs, 

of \ alaneourt, or strong appearanee of proba- PlnceJ far amid the melancholy main 

bility ; and when she rested her expectation (Whether it l)c Line fancy him l>eguiles, 

on the wealth of Madame Clairval she l^rtliat aerial boinjrs sometimes deign 

seemed totally to have forgotten that the J'f •":»•;" J/-''"»>';^licd to our senses plainX 

latter had a darter. Valancourt, howe^.r! Tt^vlli^^iJ^tc^l^^'h^^^^^^^^^^^ 

had not forgotten this circumstance ; and the A vast assembly moving to and fro, 

consideration of it had made him so modest Then all at once in air dissolves the wondrous show.* 

in his cxj)eelations from Madame Chiirvnl, Castle op Indolbkcb. 

that he had not even named the relationship Madamr Ciieron's avarice at length yielded 

111 the first conversation \\\W\ Madiuiu; Clieron. to her vanity. Some very splendid entertain- 

iJut whatever might be the future fcjrlune of ments whieh Madame Clairval had given, and 

iiniily, the present distinction whieh the con- the general adulation which was paid her 

ncMon would afford for lur.olf was ecrlain, made tlie former more anxious than before to 




inv4 voT^^^^^^ -^"^ had she consented to manii.ge of her niece, and offered to give 
.^° ; o;^; 1 ,S^ Emily a dower, provided Madame Clai™l 

i)7/i"J'///^i. -^"^ ""^^^^^^'^ conclusion, observed equal terms on the part of 

..5 iinK cojisiaoralion of her happiness iktv\\e\v. "^\w\!ccv\^ QVvvxn^sX Va&vwwjd to 



her 
the 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPttO, jx 

proposal, and, considering that Emfly \vas longer, and I wish to announce to my servants 
the apparent heiress of her aunt's wealth, that they must accept the Signer Montoni for 
accepted it. Meanwhile Emily knew nothing their master. ' Emily made a feeble attempt 
of the transaction, till Madame Cheron in- to congratulate her on these apparently im- 
formed her that she must make preparation prudent nuptials. ' I shall now celebrate my 
for the nuptials, which would be celebrated marriage with some splendour,' continue! 
without further delay : then, astonished, and Madame Montoni ; 'and to save time, I shall 
wholly unable to account for this sudden con- avail myself of the preparation that has been 
elusion, which Valancourt had not solicited made for yours, which will of course be delayed 
(for he was ignorant of what had passed a little while Such of your wedding clothes aa 
oetwecn the elder ladies, and had not dared to are ready I shall expect you will appear in, to 
hope such good fortune), she decisively do honour to this festival. I also wish you to 
objected to it. Madame Cheron, however, inform Monsieur Valancourt that I have 
quite as jealous of contradiction now as she changed my name ; and he wiU acquaint 
had been formerly, contended for a speedy Madame Clairval. In a few days I shall give 
marriage with as much vehemence as she had a grand entertainment, at which I shall 
formerly opposed whatever had the most request their presence.' 
remote possibility of leading to it ; and Emily's Emily was so lost in surprise and varions 
scruples disappeared, when she again saw thought, that she made Madame Montoni 
Valancomt, who was now informal of the scarcely any reply ; but, at her desue, she 
happiness designed for him, and came to retumeid to inform Valancourt of what had 
claim a promise of it from herself. passed. Surprise was not his predominant 

While preparations were making for these emotion on hearing of these hasty nuptials ; 
nuptials, Montoni became the acknowledged and when he learned that they were to be the 
lover of Madame Cheron ; and though Madame means of delaying his own, and that the very 
Clairval was much displeased when she heard ornaments of the chateau which had been 
of the approaching connexion, and was willing prepared to grace the nuptial-day of his Emily 
to prevent that of Valancourt with Emily, her were to be degraded to the celebration of 
conscience told her that she had no right thus Madame Montoni's, grief and indignation 
to trifle with their peace ; and Madame agitated him alternately. He could conceal 
Clairval, though a woman of fashion, was far neither from the observation of Emily ; whose 
less advanced than her friend in the art of efforts to abstract him from these serious 
deriving satisfaction from distinction and ad- emotions, and to laugh at the apprehensive 
admiration, rather than from conscience. considerations that assailed him, were incdSeo- 

Emily observed with concern the ascendancy tual ; and when at length he took leave, there 
which Montoni had acquired over Madame was an earnest tenderness in his manner that 
Cheron, as well as the increasing frequency of extremely affected her ; she even shed tears, 
his visits ; and her own opinion of this Italian when he disappeared at the end of the terrace, 
was confirmed by that of Valancourt, who had yet knew not exactly why she should do sa 
always expressed a dislike of him. As she was Montoni now took possession of the chateau, 
one mommg sitting at work in the pavilion, and the command of its inhabitants, with the 
enjoying the pleasant freshness of spring, ease of a man who had long considered it to 
whose colours were now spread upon the be his own. His friend, Cavigni, who had 
landscape, and listening to Valancourt, who been extremely serviceable in having paid 
was reading, but who often laid aside the book Madame Cheron the attention and flattery 
to converse, she received a summons to attend which she required, but from which Montom 
Madame Cheron immediately, and had too often revolted, had apartments assigned 
scarcely entered the dressing-room, when she to him, and received from the domestics an 
observed with surprise the dejection of her equal degree of obedience with the master 
aunt's countenance, and the contrasted gaiety of the mansion. 

of her dress. • So, niece !' said madame, and Within a few days, Madame Montoni, as 
she stopped under some degree of embarrass- she had promised, gave a magnificent enter- 
ment — ' I sent for you ; I — I wished to see tainment to a very mmierous company, among 
you : I have news to tell you : from this hom* whem was Valancourt, but at which Madame 
jou must consider the Signor Montoni as Clairval excused herself from attending; 
your uncle — ^we were married this morning.* There was a concert, ball, and supper. 
Astonished — not so much at the marriage, Valancourt was of course Emily's partner ; 
as at the secrecy with which it had been con- and though, when he gave a look to the 
eluded, and the agitation with which it was decorations oH the apartments, he could not 
announced — Emily at length attributed the but remember that they were designed fof 
privacy to the wish of Montoni, rather than of other festivities than those they now con* 
her aunt. ■ His wife, however, intended that tributed to celebrate, he endeavomed to check 
the contrary should be believed, and therefore his concern, by considering that a little while 
added, ' You see, I wished to avoid a bustle ; only would elapse before they would be given 
bot now the ceremony is over, I shall do so no to tUeir original dit»tiz»^QQu \>«kb% ^^siiak 



7d THE MVSTERIBS OF VDOLPHO. 

evcninsf, Madame Montoni danced, laughed, united for life, added to the dismay wl^h she 
and talked incessantly ; while Montoni, silent, must otherwise have suffered at such intelli- 
reserved, and somewhat haughty, seemed gence. When she could s}>eak, she asked the 
weary of the parade, and of the frivolous com- cause of the sudden change in madame's senti- 
pany it had drawn together. ments towards Vaiancourt ; but the only 

This was the first and the last entertain- reply she could obtain was, that the signor 
ment given in celebration of their nuptials, had forbade the connection, considering it to 
Montani, though the severity of his temper be greatly inferior to what Emily might reason- 
and the gloominess of his pride prevented ably expect 

him from enjoying such festivities, was ex- ' I now leave the afBur entirely to the 
tremely willing to promote them. It was signor,' added Madame Montoni; 'but I 
sddom that he could meet in any company a must say that M. Vaiancourt never was a 
man of more address, and still seldomer one favourite with me ; and 1 was over-persuaded, 
of more understanding than himself : the or I should not have given my consent to the 
balance of advantage in such parties, or in the connection. I was weak enough — ^I aln so 
connections which might arise from them, foolish sometimes ! — to suffer other people's 
must therefore be on his side : and knowing, uneasiness ; and so my better judgment 
as he did, the selfish purposes for which they yielded to your affliction. But the signor 
are generally frequented, he had no objection has very properly pointed out the folly of 
to measure his talents of dissimulation with this ; and he shall not have to reprove me a 
those of any other competitor for distinction second time. I am determined that you shall 
and plunder ; but his wife, who, when her submit to those who know how to guide you 
own interest was immediately concerned, had better than yourself. I am determined that 
sometimes more discernment than vanity, ac- you shall be conformable. ' 
quired a consciousness of her inferiority to Emily would have been astonished at the 
other women in personal attractions, which, assertions of this eloquent speech, had not 
uniting with the jealousy natural to the dis- her mind been so overwhelmed by die sudden 
covery, counteracted his readiness for mingling shock it had received that she scarcely heard a 
with all the parties Thoulouse could afford, word of what was latterly addressed to her. 
Till she had, as she supposed, the affections Whatever were the weaknesses of Madame 
of a husband to lose, she had no motive for Montoni, she might have avoided to accuse 
discovering the unwelcome truth, and it had herself >vith those of compassion and tender- 
never obtruded itself upon her ; but now that ness to the feelings of others, and especially 
it influenced her policy, she opposed her hus- to those of Emily. It was the same ambition, 
band's inclination for company, with the more that lately prevailed upon her to solidt an 
eagerness, because she believed him to be alliance with Madame Clairval's family, which 
really as well received in the female society of induced her to withdraw from it, now that ho* 
the place, as during his addresses to her he marriage with Montoni had exalted her self- 
had affected to be. consequence, and, with it, her views for her 

A few weeks only had elapsed since the niece, 
marriage, when Madame Montoni informed Emily was, at this time, too much affscted 
Emily that the signor intended to return to to employ either remonfitrance or entreaty on 
Italy as soon as the necessary preparation this topic ; and when, at length, she attempted 
could be made for so long a journey. ' We the latter, her emotion overcame her speech, 
shall go to Venice,' said she, 'where the signor and she retired to her apartment, to think (if 
has a fine mansion, and from thence to his in the present state of her mind to think was 
estate in Tuscany. Why do you look so possible) upon this sudden and overwhelming 
grave, child ? You, who are so fond of a subject. It was very long before her spirits 
romantic country and fine views, will doubt- were sufficiently composed to permit the 
less be delighted with this journey.' reflection ; which, when it came, was dark, 

• Am I then to be of the party, madam ?' and even terrible. She saw that Montoni 
said Emilywith extreme surprise and emotion, sought to aggrandise himself in his disF>osal 

' Most certainly,' replied her aunt : how of her and it occurred, that his friend 
could you imagine wc should leave you be- Cavigni was the person for whom he was 
hind? But I see you are thinking of the interested. The prospect of going to Italy 
chevaUer : he is not yet, I believe, informed was still rendered darker, when she considered 
of the journey ; but he very soon will be so : the tumultuous situation of that country — 
Signor Montoni is gone to acquaint Madame then torn by civil commotion ; where every 
Clairval of our journey, and to say that the petty state was at war with its neighbour, and 
proposed connection between the families even every castle liable to the attack of an 
must be thought of no more.' invader. She considered the person to whose 

The unfeeling manner in which Madame immediate guidance she would be conunitted, 
Montoni thus informed her niece that she and the vast distance that was to separate 
must be separated, perhaps for ever, from the her from Valancomt ; and, at the recollection 
wanyritU whom she was on the point of being of him, every other image vanished from her 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



73 



mind, and every thought was again obscured 
by grief. 

In this perturbed state she passed some 
hours ; and when she was summoned to 
dinner, she entreated permission to remain in 
her own apartment : but Madame Montoni 
was alone, and the request was refused. 
Emily and her aunt said little during the re- 
past — the one occupied by her griefs, the 
other engrossed by the disappointment which 
the unexpected absence of Montoni occa- 
sioned ; for not only was her vanity piqued 
by the neglect, but her jealousy alarmed by 
what she considered as a mysterious engage- 
ment. When the cloth was drawn, and they 
were alone, Emily renewed the mention of 
Valancourt : but her aunt, neither softened to 
pity nor awakened to remorse, became en- 
raged that her will should be opposed, and 
the authority of Montoni questioned, though 
this was done by Emily with her usual gentle- 
ness ; who, after a long and torturing conver- 
sation, retired in tears. 

As she crossed the hall, a person entered it 
by the great door, whom, as her eyes hastily 
glanced that way, she imagined to be Mon- 
toni ; and she was passing on with quicker 
steps, when she heard the well-known voice of 
\'alancourt. 

• Emily, O ! my Emily !' cried he in a tone 
faltering with impatience, while she turned, 
and, as he advanced, was alarmed at the ex- 
pression of his countenance and the eager 
desperation of his air. ' In tears, Emily ! — I 
would speak with you,' said he ; 'I have 
much to say : conduct me where we may con- 
verse. — But you tremble — you are ill I Let 
me lead you to a seat.' 

He observed the open door of an apartment, 
and hastily took her hand to lead her thither ; 
but she attempted to withdraw it, and said, 
with a languid smile, ' I am better already ; if 
you wish to see my aunt she is in the dining- 
parlour.' — ' I must speak vfWhyou, my Emily,' 
replied Valancourt. ' Good God ! is it already 
come to this ? — Are you indeed so willing to 
resign me? — But this is an improper place — I 
am overheard. Let me entreat your attention, 
if only for a few minutes.' — When you have 
seen my aunt,' said Emily. — ' I was wretched 
enough when I came hither,' exclaimed Valan- 
court : ' do not increase my misery by this 
coldness — this cruel refusal* 

The despondency with which he spoke this 
affected her almost to tears ; but she persisted 
in refusing to hear him till he had conversed 
witti Madame Montoni ? ' Where is her hus- 
band? where, then, is Montoni?' said Valan- 
court in an altered tone : ' it is he to whom I 
must speak.' 

Emily, terrified for the consequence of the 
indignation that flashed in his eyes, trem- 
blingly assured him that Montoni was not at 
home, and entreated he would endeavour to 
iQoderate his resentment, At the tremulpus 



accents of her voice his eyes softened instantly 
from wildness into tenderness. ' You are ill, 
Emily,' said he — ' They will destroy us both I 
Forgive me, that I dared to doubt your affec- 
tion.' 

Emily no longer opposed him, as he led her 
into an adjoining peu'lour. The manner in 
which he had named Montoni, had so much 
alarmed her for his own safety, that she was 
now only too anxious to prevent the conse- 
quences of this just resentment. He listened 
to her entreaties with attention, but replied to 
them only with looks of despondency and 
tenderness ; concealing as much as possible 
the sentiments he felt toward Montoni, that 
he might soothe the apprehensions which dis- 
tressed her. But she saw the veil he had 
spread over his resentment ; and his assumed 
tranquillity only alarming her more, she urged, 
at length, the impolicy of forcing an interview 
with Montoni, and of taking any measure 
which might render their separation irremedi- 
able. Valancourt 3rielded to these remon- 
strances : and her affecting entreaties drevr 
from him a promise, that, however Montoni 
might persist in his design of disuniting them, 
he would not seek to redress his wrongs by 
violence. — ' For my sake,' said Emily. ' let the 
consideration of what I should siiffer deter 
you from such a mode of revenge l' — * For 
your sake, Emily,' replied Valancourt, his 
eyes filling with tears of tenderness and grief, 
while he gazed upon her, ' Yes — yes — I shall 
subdue myself. But though I have given you 
my solemn promise to do this, do not expect 
that I can tamely submit to the authority of 
Montoni : if I could, I should be unworthy of 
you. Yet, O Emily ! how long may he con- 
demn me to hve without you — how long may 
it be before you return to France !' 

Emily endeavoured to soothe him with as- 
surances of her unalterable affection, and by 
representing that, in little more than a year, 
she should be her own mistress, as far as 
related to her aunt, from whose guardianship 
her age would then release her — assurances 
which gave litde consolation to Valancourt, 
who considered that she would then be in 
Italy, and in the power of those whose do- 
minion over her would not cease with their 
rights : but he affected to be consoled by 
them. Emily, comforted by the promise she 
had obtained, and by his apparent compo- 
sure, was about to leave him, when her aunt 
entered the room. She threw a glance of 
sharp reproof upon her niece, who inunedi- 
ately withdrew, and of haughty displeasure 
upon Valancourt. 

' This is not the conduct I should have ex- 
pected from you, sir,' said she : * I did not 
expect to see you in my house, after you had 
been informed that your visits were no longer 
agreeable ; much less, that you would seek a 
clandestine interview with. tK^ xc^^^^y^a^ "^oax 

she vf g\\\d §twvx Qw^C 



74 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



Valanconrt, perceiving it necessary to vindi- 
cate Kmily from such a design, explained, 
that the purpose of his o^mi visit had been to 
request an interview with Montoni 1 and he 
then entered upon the subject of it, with the 
tempered spirit which the sex rather than 
the respectability of Madame Montoni de- 
manded. 

His expostulations were answered with 
severe rebuke : she lamented again, that her 
prudence had ever yielded to what she termed 
compassion ; and added, ' that she was so 
sensible of the folly of her former consent, 
that, to prevent the possibility of a repetition, 
she had committed the affair entirely to the 
conduct of Signor Montoni.* 

The feeling eloquence of Valancourt, how- 
ever, at length made her sensible, in some 
measure, of her unworthy conduct ; and she 
became susceptible to shame, but not remorse ; 
she hated Valancourt, who awakened her to 
this painful sensation ; and in proportion as 
she grew dissatisfied with herself, her abhor- 
rence of him increased. This was also the 
more inveterate, because his tempered words 
and manner were such as, without accusing 
her, compelled her to accuse herself, and 
neither left her hope that the odious portrait 
was the caricature of his prejudice, nor 
afforded her an excuse for expressing the 
violent resentment with which she contem- 
plated it At length, her anger rose to such a 
height, that Valancourt was compelled to 
leave the house abruptly, lest he should forfeit 
his own esteem by an intemperate rq^ly. lie 
was then convinced, that from Madame Mon- 
toni he had nothing to hope ; for what, of 
cither pity or justice, could be expected from 
a person who could feel the pain of guilt 
without the humility of repentance ? 

To Montoni he looked with equal despond- 
ency ; since it was nearly evident that this 
plan of separation originated with him, and 
it was not probable that he would rehnquish 
his own views to entreaties or remonstrances 
which he must have foreseen, and have been 
prepared to resist. Yet, remembering his 
promise to Emily, and more solicitous con- 
cerning his love than jealous of his con- 
sequence. Valancoiu-t was careful to do 
nothing that might unnecessarily irritate 
Montoni : he wrote to him, therefore, not to 
demand an interview, but to solicit one ; and 
having done this, he endeavoured to wait 
with calmness his reply. 

Madame Clairval was passive in the aflTair. 
When she gave her approbation to Valan- 
court's marriage, it was in the belief that 
Emily would be the heiress of Madame 
Montoni's fortmie ; and though, upon the 
nuptials of the latter, when she perceived the 
fallacy of this expectation, her conscience had 
withheld her from adopting anv measure to 
prevent the union, her benevolence was not 
sumciemly active to impel her towards aiv.7 



step that ndglit now promote it. She was, 00 
the contrary, secretly pleased that Valancourt 
was released from an epgagement whidi she 
considered to be as mfcndr, in point of for- 
tune, to his merit, as bis alliance was thoi^bl 
by Montoni to be hmniliating to the beauty 
of Emily ; and thoogfa her pride was wounded 
by this rejecdon of a member of her family, 
she disdained to show resentment otherwise 
than by silence. 

Montoni, in his reply to Valancooit, said, 
that as an interview could neither remove the 
objections of the one, nor overcome the wishes 
of the other, it would serve only to produce 
useless altercation between thnn ; be there- 
fore thought proper to refuse it. 

In consideration of the policy sugjg^sted by 
Emily, and of his promise to her, valancourt 
restrained the impulse that urged him to Ae 
house of Montom to demand what had been 
denied to his entreaties : he on^ repeated his 
solicitations to see him ; seconmng them with 
all the arguments his situation could suggest 
Thus several days passed, in remonstrance cm 
one side, and iimexible denial on the other ; 
for whether it was fear, or shame, or the 
hatred which results from both, that made 
Montoni shun the man he bad injured, 
he was peremptory in his refusal, and was 
neither softened to pity by the agony which 
Valancourt's letters portrayed* nor awaliened 
to a repentance of his own injustice bj the 
strong remonstrances he emfdoyed. At 
length, Valancourt's letters were returned un- 
opened ; and then, in the first moments d 
passionate despair, he forgot every prcmiise to 
Emily, except the solenm one which bound 
him to avoid violence, and hastened to 
Montoni's chateau, determined to see him 
by whatever other means might be necessary. 
Montoni was denied ; and Valancourt, 
when he afterwards inquired for Madame 
and Ma'amselle St Aubert, was absolutely 
refused admittance by the servants. Not 
choosing to submit himself to a contest with 
these, he at length departed ; and returning 
home in a state of mind approaching- to 
phrensy, wrote to Emily of what oad passed — 
expressed without restraint all the agony of 
his heart — and entreated that, since he must 
not otherwise hope to see her immediate^, 
she would allow him an interview unknown to 
Montoni. Soon after he had dispatched this, 
his passions becoming more temperate, he 
was sensible of the error he had committed, 
in having given Emily a new subject of dis- 
tress in the strong mention of his own suffer- 
ing, and would have given half the world, 
had it been his, to recover the letter. Emily, 
however, was spared the pain she must have 
received from it, by the suspicious policy of 
Madame Montoni ; who had ordered that 
all letters addressed to her niece should be 
delivered to herself, and who, after having 
\ier\x,^eA.\)K», ;xw^Vwi\3\^«i^^^t ^v^tessions of 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 73 . 

resentment which Valancourt's mention of proved me because I did not think proper to 

Montoni provoked, had consigned it to the bestow my niece upon him, and then have 

flames. persisted in troublinT the signor because he 

Montoni, meanwhile, every day more im- did not think proper to enter into any dispute 

patient to leave France, gave repeated orders about so childish an affair. His behaviour 

for dispatch to the servants employed in pre- throughout has been extremely presumptuous 

parations for the journey, and to ,the persons and impertinent ; and I desire that I may 

with whom he was transacting some particular never hear his name repeated, and that you 

business. He preserved a steady silence to will get the better of those foolish sorrows 

the letters in which Valancourt, despairing of and whims, and look like other people, and 

greater good, and having subdued the passion not appear with that dismal countenance as tf 

that had transgressed against his policy, you were ready to cry ; for though you say 

solicited only the indulgence of being allowed nothing, you cannot conceal your grief from 

to bid Emily farewell. But when Valancourt my penetration : I can see you are ready to cry 

learned that she was really to set out in a few at this moment, though I am reproving you for 

clays, and that it was designed he should see it — ^ay, even now, in spite of my command.' 

her no more, forgetting every consideration of Emily, having turned away to hide her 

prudence, he dared, in a second letter to tears, quitted the room to indulge them ; and 

Emily, to propose a clandestine marriage, the day was passed in an intensity of anguish. 

This also was transmitted to Madame Mon- such as she had, perhaps, never known 

toni ; and the last day of Emily's stay at before. When she withdrew to her chamber 

Thoulouse arrived, without affording Valan- for the night, she remained in the chair where 

court even a line to soothe his sufferings, or a she had placed herself on entering the room, 

hope that he should be allowed a parting absorbed in her grief, till long after every 

interview. member of the family, except herself, was r&» 

During this period of tortiuing suspense to tired to rest. She could not divest herself of 
Valancourt, Emily was sunk into that kind of a belief that she had parted with Valancoort 
stupor with which sudden and irremediable to meet no more — a belief which did not arise 
misfortune sometimes overwhelms the mind, merely from foreseen circumstances ; for 
Loving him with the tenderest affection, and though the length of the journey she was 
having long been accustomed to consider him about to commence, the uncertainty as to the 
as the friend and companion of all her future period of her return, together vnth the jmx)- 
days, she had no ideas of happiness that were hibitions she had received, seemed to justify 
not connected with him. What then must it, she yielded also to an impression, whi<^ 
have been her suffering, when thus suddenly she mistook for a presentiment, that she was. 
they were to be separated, perhaps for ever ! — going from Valancourt for ever. How dread- 
certainly to be thrown into distant parts of ful to her imagination, too, was the distance 
the world, where they could scarcely hear that would separate them — the Alps, those 
of each other's existence ; — and all this in tremendous barriers I would rise, and whole 
obedience to the will of a stranger (for such countries extend between the regions where 
was Montoni), and of a person who had but each must exist ! To live in adjoining pro- 
lately been anxious to hasten their nuptials ! vinces, to live even in the same coimtry, 
It was in vain that she endeavoured to sub- though without seeing him, was comparative 
due her grief, and resign herself to an event happiness to the conviction of this dreadfid 
which she could not avoid. The silence of length of distance. 

Valancourt afflicted more than it surprised Her mind was at length so much agitated 
her, since she attributed it to its just occasion ; by the consideration of her state, and the 
but when the day preceding that on which she belief that she had seen Valancourt for the 
was to quit Thoulouse arrived, and she had last time, that she suddenly became very faint ; 
heard no mention of his being permitted to and looking round the chamber for something 
take leave of her, grief overcame every con- that might revive her, she observed the case- 
sideration that had made her reluctant to ments, and had just strength to throw one 
speak of him, and she inquired of Madame open, near which she seated hersdf. The air 
Montoni whether this consolation had been recalled her spirits, and the still moon-light, 
refused. Her aunt informed her that it had ; that fell upon the elms of a long avenue front- 
adding that, after the provocation she had ing the window, somewhat sooAed them, and 
herself received from Valancourt in their fest determined her to try whether exercise and 
interview, and the persecution which the the open air would not relieve the intense 
signor had suffered from his letters, no en- pain that boimd her temples. In the chateau 
treaties should avail to procure it. — 'If the all was still : and passing down the great ' 
chevalier expected this favour from us,' said staircase into the hall, from whence a passage 
she, ' he should have conducted himself in a led immediately to the garden,' she softly, and 
very different manner : he should have waited imheard, as she thought, imlocked the door, 
patiently, till he knew whether we were dis- and entered the avenue. Emily passed on, 
posed to grant it, and not have come and re- with steps now hurried a-wd "ws^ l'a5*sKSv%>'*^ 



^ Tfin MY ST BR IKS OP VDOLPHO. 

« 

deceived by the shadows among the trees, she • O my Emily 1' he reStuned after a long 

fancied she saw some person move in the pause, ' 1 do then see you once again, and 

distant perspective, and feared it was a spy of hear again the sound of that voice ! I have 

Madame Montoni. Her desire, however, to haunted this place, these giardens — ^for many, 

rerisit the pavilion where she had passed so many nights — ^with a fiaint, very feint hope oif 

many happy hours with Valancourt, and had seeing you. This was the only chance that 

admired with him the extensive prospect over remained for me ; and, thank Heaven I it has 

Langucdoc and her native Gascony, overcame at length succeeded — I am not condemned to 

her apprehension of being observed, and she absolute despair V 

moved on towards the terrace, which, running Emily said something, she scarcely knew 

along the upper garden, commanded the what, expressive of her unalterable affection, 

whole of the lower one, and communicated and endeavoured to calm the i^tation of his 

with it by a flight of marble steps that ter- mind ; but Valancourt could for some time 

minated the avenue. only utter incoherent expressions of his emo- 

Having reached these steps, she paused a tions ; and when he was somewhat more corn- 
moment to look round ; for her distance from posed, he said, ' I came hither soon after sun- 
the chateau now increased the fear which the set, and have been watching in the gardens and 
stillness and obsciuity of the hour had in this pavilion ever since ; for though I had 
avrakened. But perceiving nothing that now given up all hope of seeing you, I couldnot 
could justify it, she ascended to the ter- resolve to tear myself away from a place, so 
race; where the moon-light showed the long near to you, and should probably have lingered 
btoad walk, with the pavilion at its extremity, about the chateau till morning dawned. O 
while the mys silvered the foliage of the high how heavily the moments have passed 1 jret^nth 
trees and shrubs that bordered it on the right, what various emotions have they been marked, 
and the tufted summits of those that rose as I sometimes thought I heard foosteps, and 
to a level witl# tlie balustrade on the left fancied you were approaching, and then again 
from the garden below, her distance from the — ^perceived only a dead and dreary ^ence ! 
chateau again alarming her, she paused to But when you opened the door of the pavi- 
listen ; the night was so calm that no sound lion, and the darkness prevented my distin- 
could have escaped ; but she heard only the guishing with certainty whether it was my 
plaintive sweetness of the nightingale, with love, my heart beat so strongly with hopes 
the light shiver of the leaves, and she pursued and fears that I could not speaSc. The instant 
her way towards the pavilion ; having reached I heard the plaintive accents of your voice, 
which, its obscurity did not prevent the emo- my doubts vanished — ^but not my fears, till 
tion that a fuller view of its well-known scene you spoke of me ; then, losing the appr^en- 
would have excited. The lattices were thrown sion of alarming you in the excess of my emo- 
back, and showed, beyond their embowered tion, I could no longer be silent. — O Emily ! 
arch, the moon-light landscape, shadowy and these are moments in which joy and 
soft — its groves and plains extending gradu- grief struggle so powerfully for pre-eminence, 
ally and indistinctly to the eye ; its distant that the heart can scarcely support the con- 
mountains catching a stronger gleam ; and test !* 

the nearer river reflecting the moon, and Emily's heart acknowledged the truth of 

trembling to her rays. this assertion. But the joy she felt on thus 

Emily, as she approached the lattice, was meeting Valancourt, at the very moment when 

sensible of the features of this scene only as she was lamenting that they must probably 
they served to bring Valancourt more immedi- meet no more, soon melted into grief, as re- 
ately to her fancy. 'Ah I' said she with a flection stole over her thoughts, and imagina- 

heavy sigh, as she threw herself into a chair tion prompted visions of the future. She 

bythe window, how often have we sat together struggled to recover the calm dignity of 

on this spot— often have looked upon that mind which was necessary to support her 

landscape ! Never, never more shall we view through this last interview, and which Valan- 

it together ! — never, never more, perhaps, court found it utterly impossible to attain ; for 

shall we look upon each other l' the transports of his joy changed abruptly 

Her tears were suddenly stopped by terror : into those of suffering, and he expressed in 

a voice spoke near her in the pavilion — she the most impassioned language his horror of 

shrieked : it spoke again ; and she dislin- this separation, and his despair of their ever 

guished the well known tones of Valancourt. masting again. Emily wept silently as she 
It was, indeed, Valancourt who supported her listened to him ; and then, trying to command 
in his arms ! For some moments their emotion her own distress, and to soothe him, she sug- 

would not suffer either to speak.—' Emily,' gested every circmnstance that could lead to 
^d Valancourt at length, as he pressed her hope. But the energy of his fears led him 

hand m his, • Emily !'— and he was again instantly to detect the friendly fallacies which 

silent ; but the accent in which he had pro- she endeavoured to impose on herself and on 

nounced her name expressedall his tenderness him, and also to conjure up illusions too 

and sorrow. powerful for his reason. 



THE MVSTERIMS OF UDOLPHO. 77 

•You are going from me/ said he, 'to a proposal dictated by love and despair, and 

distant country — O how distant! to new enforced at a moment when it seemed scarcely 

society, new friends, new admirers ! with peo- possible for her to oppose it — ^when her heart 

pie, too, who will try to make you forget me, was softened by the sorrows of separation that 

and to promote new connexions ! How can I might be eternal, and her reason obscured by 

know this, and not know that you will never the illusions of love and terror — encouraged 

return for me-^never can be mine?" His voice him to hope that it would not be rejected. — 

was stifled by sighs. ' Speak, my Emily !' said Valancourt eagerly : 

' You believe, then,' said Emily, ' that the 'let me hear your voice, let me hear you con- 
pangs I suffer proceed from a trivial and tem- firm my fate.' — She spoke not : her cheek was 

porary interest : you believe ' cold, and her senses seemed to fail her ; but 

• * Suffer,* interrupted Valancourt, 'suffer for she did not faint. To Valancourt's terrified 

me I O Emily, how sweet, how bitter, are imagination she appeared to be dying : he 

those words ! what comfort, what angfuish, called upon her name, rose to go to the 

do they give ! I ought not to doubt the chateau for assistance, and then, recollecting 

steadiness of your affection ; yet, such is the her situation, feared to go, or to leave her for 

inconsistency of real love, that it is always a moment. 

awake to suspicion, however unreasonable — After a few minutes she drew a deep sigh, 

always requiring new assurances from the ob- and began to revive. The conflict she had 

ject of its interest : and thus it is, that I always suffered, between love and the duty she at 

feel revived, as by a new conviction, when your present owed to her father's sister ; her repug- 

words tell me I am dear to you ; and wanting nance to a clandestine marriage ; her fear of 

these, I relapse into doubt, and too often into emerging on the world with embarrassments, 

despondency.' — Then seeming to recollect such as might ultimately involve the object of 

himself, he exclaimed, ' But what a wretch am her affection in misery and repentance — all 

I, thus to torture you, and in these moments, this various interest was too powerful for a 

too! I, who ought to support and comfort mind already enervated by sorrow, and her 

you.' reason had suffered a transient suspension. 

This reflection overcame Valancourt with But duty and good sense, however hard the 

tenderness ; but, relapsing into despondency, conflict, at length triumphed over affection 

he again felt only for himself, and lamented and mournful presentiment. Above all, she 

again this cruel separation, in a voice and dreaded to involve Valancourt in obscurity 

words so impassioned that Emily could no and vain regret, which she saw, or thought 

longer struggle to repress her own grief, or to she saw, must be the too certain consequence 

soothe his. Valancourt, between these emo- of a marriage in their present circumstances ; 

tlons of love and pity, lost the power, and and she acted, perhaps, with somewhat more 

almost the wish, of repressing his agitation : than female fortitude, when she resolved to 

and, in the interval of convulsive sobs, he at endure a present, rather than provoke a 

one moment kissed away her tears ; then told distant misfortune. 

her, cruelly, that possibly she might never With a candour that proved how truly she 

weep for him ; and then tried to speak more esteemed and loved him, and which endeared 

calmly, but only exclaimed, ' O Emily— my her to him, if possible, more than ever, she 

heart will break ! — I cannot, cannot leave you 1 told Valancourt all her reasons for rejecting 

Now, I gaze upon that countenance, now I his proposals. Those which influenced her 

hold you in my arms ! — a little while, and all concerning his future welfare, he instantly 

this will appear a dream : I shall look, and refuted, or rather contradicted ; but they 

cannot see you ; shall try to recollect your awakened tender considerations for her, 

featiu%s, and the impression will be fled from which the frenzy of passion and despair had 

my imagination ; to hear the tones of your concealed before ; and love, which had but 

voice, and even memory will be silent! — I- lately prompted him to propose a clandestine 

<^uinot, cannot leave you ! — Why should we and immediate marriage, now induced him to 

confide the happiness of our whole Uves to the renounce it. The triumph was almost too 

will of people who have no right to interrupt, much for his heart ; for Emily's sake, he en- 

and, except giving you to me, have no power deavoured to stifle his grief ; but the swelling 

to promote it?' O Emily! venture to trust anguish would not be restrained : — 'O Emily l' 

SHUT own heart— venture to be mine for ever !' said he, ' I must leave you^— I must leave you 

is voice trembled, and he was silent. Emily — ^and I know it is for ever 1' 

continued to weep, and was silent also ; when Convulsive sobs again interrupted his words, 

Valancourt proceeded to propose an immediate and they wept together in silence ; till Emily, 

marriage, and that at an early hour on the recollecting the danger of being discovered, 

following morning she should quit Madame and the impropriety of prolonging an inter- 

Montoni's house, and be conducted by him to view which might subject her to censure 

the chiurch of the Augustines, where a friar summoned all her fortitude to utter a last 

should await to unite them. farewell ! 

The silence with which she listened to a ' Stay 1* said ValaucQUit., ' 1 ^a^rcv^asa ^^Ni.> 



73 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

I My, for I linvc much to tell you. Tlie agita- remain in uncertainty on a point ^ere 8US» 

lion of mind J ins hiiln-rio sun'irod mc to speak pcnse is almost intolerable. Think, lunily, 

only on the .-uljcci that oLcupiLd it : 1 have what I must suffer to see you depart for a 

forborne lo v..:-\ v.ow ii doiil.t of niudi import- foreign country, conunitted to the power of a 

ancv. i\iril> !• i ii s-hould appear as if I told it man of such dcnibtfol character as is this 




couri. but A.M I i him fioni the iv.\ilion ; r.nd lo ; yet, Emily, _ consider well before you 

as ih'v walked upon the tcrrdce, he procecdc-l resolve to commit yourself to him. O! I 

as f<..';:'.v.-: must not trust myself to speak— or I shall 

•'i'hi.r^rontoni— I h.-.vch-:nrdFo:v.c strange renounce all the motives wluch v> lately 

bints c.M-.xrr.inu: him— ;::e >ou Leruin that he influepccd me to resign the hope of your 

is oi :.!;".Linie Cjuc-iu.r.-. f.;iuily. and that his becoming mine immediately/ 

foiLune is v.]...t it ap-.)C.:r> to be?" Valancourt w-alked upon the tenaco mih 

• 1 hive n(i reason to doubt either,' replied hurried steps, while Emily remained leaning 

Emily in a voice of abnii. ' Of the first, in- on the balustrade in deep thought The 

deed, 1 cannoi doubi ; but I have no certain information she had just received exched, 

means of jufl;;ini; of the latter, and I entreat perhaps, more alarm than it could justify, 

you will tell me all yon have heard.' and raised once more the conflict of con- 

•That 1 ce-tainly will ; but it is very imper- trasted interest She had never liked Mon- 

foci a?ul inisiiii>raetory information: I sjaihered toni : the fire and keenness of his eye. Its 

it by iiceident from an Italian, who was speak- proud exultation, its bold fierceness, its sullen 

in;^ to anothcT person of this Slontoni. They watchfulness, as occasion, and even sUgfat 

were talkiiiL; of hi"; marriage : the Italian said, occasion, had called forth the latent soul, die 

" thai if he was the person he meant, he was had often obsenr-cd with emotion ; while from 

not likely to iMali'j Madame Clieron happy." the usual expression of his countenance die 

He proceeded to :>j;cak of him in general had always shrunk. From such observations 

terms of dislike, and th.-n gave .some par- she was the more inclined to believe that it 

ticular hints concernin.i;: his character, that was this Montoni of whom the Italian bed 

excited my curiosity, and I ventured to ask uttered his suspicious hints. The thought of 

him a fi^w questions. He was reserved in his being solely in his power, in a foreign kuid, 

replies ; but after hesitating for some time, was terrifymg to her ; it was not by terror 

Ik: owned that he had understood abroad that alone that she was urged to an immediate 




:ind of .' omc stranp^e circumstances that ml^ht duty, her disinterested considerations for VabA- 

be nieniioued as lo his former mode of life, court, and the delicacy which made her 

1 premised him lo inform me further; but I revolt from a clandestine union. It was not 

birlieve i.'ic ilro.i,; iaterest I felt was visible in to be expected that a vague terror would be 

my manner, ami alarmed him ; for no more powerful than the united influence of 

entreaties eould ])revail with him to give love and grief; but it recalled all their 

any explanation of the eireumst inces he had energy, and rendered a second conquest 

iUlin.cd to, or to mention anvthing fuidier necessary. 

o-)ncirn:iirr Momc.ni. 1 obsJrved to him, With Valancourt, whose imagination was 

ihc' A ni nn ,w?^^ ,?" ol.!'!* i.^!;/''r_'i °^ ^ ^'^-^^^ }^ ^^9'^' ^^^■''^^^ ^? ^^^^ suggestion of evenr passion ; 

"" ' ^ -- 1 . . . - - ... d acquired 

them, and 

rful as his 

brooded over them — wdi Valancourt no 

He thought 

and love assisted 

to Italy would 

Emily in misery': he detemuned. 





t-^.rose from iDc'r:..?.!!? ,!!'!I?_r'i''/5.f f^'cquenily 'this is no tinrie f9r scrupulous distinctions, 

rativdy 

ct our 

«-«s aianncd for iV"~" " """' ^"''^"^ "'^t uuure comiort. i now see much more clearly 

hatl already suicl • . '^ ^^"^^^"^"cc of what than before the train of serious dangers you 

. ana l was comv^WcA lo cue ^o\t\« \.o txv<io\xTv\Rx >k\\K ti xrwn of Mon- 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 79 

toni's character. Those dark hints of the * Think of you !— love you !* exdaimed 

Italian spoke much, but not more than the Valancourt 

idea I have of Montoni's disposition, as exhi- 'Try to moderate these iransp<Mts,' said 

bited even in his countenance. I think I see, Emily ; ' for my sake, try.' 

at this moment, all that could have been hinted ' For your sake 1' 

written there. He is the Italian whom I * Yes, for my sake,' replied Emily in a 

fear ; and I conjiure you, for your own sake as tremulous voice : I cannot leave you thus I' 

well as for mine, to prevent the evils I shud- * Then do not leave me !' said Valancourt 

der to foresee. O Emily ! let my tenderness, with quickness. Why should we part, or 

my arms withhold you from them — give me part for longer than till to-morrow ?' 

the right to defend you.' 'I am, indeed I am, unequal to these 

Emily only sighed ; while Valancourt im*o- moments,' replied Emily ; ' you tear my 
ceeded to remonstrate, and to entreat, with heart ; but I never can consent to this hasty, 
all the energy that love and apprehension imprudent proposal I' 

could inspire. But, as his imagination mag- ' If we could command our time, my 
nified to her the possible evils she was going Emily, it should not be thus hasty ; wc must 
to meet, the mists of her own fancy began to submit to circumstances. ' 
dissipate, and allowed her to distinguish the ' We must, indeed ! I have ah^ady told 
exaggerated images which imposed on his you all my heart. My spirits are gone. You 
reason. She considered that there was no allowed the force of my objections, till your 
proof of Montoni being the person whom the tenderness called up vague terrors, which 
stranger had meant ; that, even if he was so, the have given us both unnecessary anguish. 
Italian had noticed his character and broken Spare me ! do not oblige me to repeat the 
fortunes merely from report ; and that, though reasons I have already urged." 
&e countenance of Montoni seemed to give • Spare you !' cried Valancourt. * I am a 
probability to a part of the rumour, it was wretch, a very wretch, that have felt only for 
not by such circumstances that an implicit myself! — I, who ought to have shown the forti- 
belid"of it could be justified. These consi- tudeof man, who ought to have supported you; 
derations would probably not have arisen so — I have increased your sufferings by the con- 
disthictly to her mind, at this time, had not duct of a child ! Forgive mc, Emily ; think 
the terrors of Valancourt presented to her such of the distraction of my mind, now that I am 
obvious exaggerations of her danger as in- about to part with all that is dear to me, and 
cited her to distrust the fallacies of passion, forgive me I When you are gone, I shall 
6&t while she endeavoured in the gentlest recollect with bitter remorse what I have made 
manner to convince him of his error, she you suffer, and shall wish in vain that I could 
plunged Wm into a new one : his voice and see you, if only for a moment, that I might 
countenance changed to an expression of dark soothe your grief.' 

de^>air — ' Emily 1' said he, ' this, this moment Tears again interrupted his voice, and 
is tne bitterest that is yet come to me. You Emily wept with him. ' I will show myself 
do not— cannot love me ! — It would be impos- more worthy of your love,' said Valancourt, 
sihle for you to reason thus coolly, thus at length — • I will not prolong these moments, 
deliberately, if you did. I, / am torn with My Emily! my own Emily ! never forget me ! 
anguish at the prospect of our separation, God knows when we shall meet again I I 

and of the evils that may await you in conse*- resign you to His care. O God I O God I 

quence of it ; I would encounter any hazards protect and bless her !' 

to prevent it — to save you. No, Emily I no 1 He pressed her hand to his heart. Emily 

— ^you cannot love me !' sunk almost lifeless on his bosom, and neither 

* We have now little time to wnste in excla- wept nor spoke. Valancourt, now command- 
mation or assertion,' said Emily, endeavour- inghis owh distress, tried to comfort and re- 
ing to conceal her emotion : ' if you are yet assure her ; but she appeared totally unaffected 
to learn how dear you are, and ever must be, by what he said ; and a sigh which she uttered 
to my heart, no assurances of mine can g^ve now and then, was all that proved she had not 
you conviction.' fainted. 

The last words faltered on her lips, and her He supported her slowly towards the 
tears flowed fast. These words and tears chateau, weeping, and speaking to her : but 
brought once more, and with instantaneous she answered only in sighs, till, having reached 
force, conviction of her love to Valancourt. the gate that terminated the avenue, she 
He could only exclaim, * Emily ! Emily!' and seemed to have recovered her consciousness, 
weep over the hand he pressed to his lips ; and, looking round, perceived how near they 
but she, after some moments, again roused were to the chateau. ' We must part here,' 
herself from the indulgence of sorrow and said said she, stopping. 'Why prolong these 
— • I must leave you : it is late, and my absence moments? Teach me the fortitude I have 
from the chateau may be discovered. Think forgot.' 

of me — love me — ^whcn I am far away : the Valancourt struggled to assume a composed 
t>elief of this wiU be my comfort I' air. ' Faxew^U^ m^ lw<i V ^■^.S;^ Xx^ \si.'^^^>K.^ 



8o THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPMO. 

of solemn tenderness, ' trust me, we shall an expression of tempered tesignalkm, as a 

meet again — ^meei for each other — meet to thin veU, thrown over the features of beauty, 

part no more I' His voice faltered, but recover- renders them more interestingr by a partial 

ing it, he proceeded in a firmer tone. ' You concealment But Madame Montoni observed 

know not what I shall suffer till I hear from nothing in this countenance except its unusual 

you : I shall omit no opportunity of conveying paleness, which attracted her censure. She 

to you my letters ; yet 1 tremble to think how told her niece that she had been indulging in 

few may occur. And trust me, love, for your fanciful sorrows, and begged she would have 

dear sake I will try to bear this absence with more r^ard for decorum, than to let the 

fortitude. O how little I have shown to-night 1' world see that she could not icnounoe an im- 

' Farewell !' said Emily, faintly. ' When proper attachment : at which Emily's pale 

you arc gone, I shall think of many things I cheek became flushed with crimson— bitt it 

would have said to you.' was the blush of pride— and sbe made no 

' And I of many, many !' said Valancourt answer. Soon after, Montoni entered the 

' I never left you yet, that I did not immc- breakfast-room, spoke little, and seemed im- 

diatcly remember some question, or some en- patient to be gone. 

treaty, or some circumstance concerning my The windows of this room opened upon 

love, that 1 earnestly wished to mention, and the garden. As Emily passed them, she saw 

felt wretched because I could not. O Emily ! the spot where she had parted with Valancouit 

this countenance on which I now gaze, will on the preceding night ; the remembrance 

in a moment be gone from my eyes, and not pressed heavily on her heart, and she turned 

all the efforts of fimcy will be able to recall it hastily away from the object that had 

with exactness. Oli, what an infinite dif- awakened it 

ferencc between this moment and the next ! — The baggage being at len|^h adjusted, the 

now, I am in your presence, can behold you ! travellers entered their carnages ; unA Emihr 

f/tcn, nil will be a dreary blank, — ^and I shall would have left the chateau without one sigh 

be a wanderer, exiled from my only home !' of regret, had it not been situated in me 

Valancourt again pressed her to his heart, neighbourhood of Valancourt's residence. 

and held her there in silence, weeping. Tears From a little eminence she looked back 

once again calmed her oppressed mind. They upon Thoulouse, and the far-seen jdains of 

again bade each other farewell, lingered a Gascony, beyond which the broken summits 

moment, and then parted. Valancourt seemed of the Pyrenees appeared on the distant hoii- 

to force himself from the spot — he passed zon, lighted up by a morning sun. * Dear 

hastily up the avenue ; and Emily, as she pleasant mountains 1' said she to herself, 

moved slowly towards the chateau, heard his ' how long may it be ere I see you again, and 

distant steps. She listened to the sounds as how much may happen to make me nus^able 

they sunk fainter and fainter, till the melan- in the interval 1 O, could I now be certain 

choly stillness of night alone remained, and that I should ever return to you, and find that 

then hurried to her chamber to seek repose, Valancourt still lived for me, I should go in 

which, alas 1 was fled from her wretchedness, peace ! He will still gaze on you — gaze, when 

I am far away !' 

-— . The trees that impended over the high 

banks of the road, and formed a line 

PRAPTPP vv ^^ the perspective with the distant country. 

v.n/vi 1 C.K. Av. jjQ^ threatened to exclude the view of 

'Where'er I roam, whatever realms I see, them; but the bluish mountains Still 

My heart, untravcird, still shall turn to thee.' appeared beyond the dark foliage, and Emily 

uoLDSMiTH. continued to lean from the coach window 

The carnages were at the gates at an early till at length the closing branches shut them 

hour. The bustle of the domestics passing from her sight. 

to and fro in the galleries awakened Emily Another object soon caught her attention. 
from harassing slumbers ; her unquiet mind She had scarcely looked at a person who 
had during the night presented her with walked along the bank, with his hat, in which 
terrific images and obscure circumstances con- was the military feather, drawn over his eyes, 
ceming her affection and her future life. She before at the sound of wheels, he suddenly 
now endeavoured to chase away the impres- turned, and she perceived that it was Valan- 
sions they had left on her fancy ; but from court himself, who waved his hand, sprung 
imaginary evils she awoke to the conscious- into the road, and through the window of the 
ncss of real ones. Recollecting that she had carriage put a letter into her hand. He en- 
parted with Valancourt, perhaps for ever, her dcavoured to smile through the despau: that 
heart sickened as memorj' revived. But she tried overspread his countenance as she passed on. 
to dismiss the dismal forebodings that crowded The remembrance of that smile seemed im- 




THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 



8i 



high trees that waved over him, and pursuing 
the carriage with his eyes. He waved his 
hand, and she continued to gaze till distance 
confused his figure ; and at length another 
turn of the road entirely separated him from 
her sight 

Having stopped to take up Signor Cavigni 
at a chateau on the road, the travellers, of 
whom Emily was disrespectfully seated with 
Madame Montoni's woman in a second car- 
riage, pursued their way over the plains of 
Languedoc. The presence of this servant 
restrained Emily from reading Valancourt's 
letter, for she did not choose to expose the 
emotions it might occasion to the observation 
of any person : yet such was her wish to read 
this his last communication, that her trembling 
hand was every moment on the point of 
breaking the seal. 

At length they reached the village, where 
they stayed only to change horses, without 
alighting ; and it was not till they stopped to 
dine that Emily had an opportunity of read- 
mg the letter. Though she had never doubted 
the sincerity of Valancourt's affection, the 
fresh assurances she now received of it revived 
htt spirits ; she wept over his letter in ten^ier- 
ness, laid it by to be referred to when they 
jBhould be particularly depressed, and then 
thought of him with much less anguish than 
she had done since they parted. Among some 
other requests which were interesting to her, 
because expressive of his tenderness, and be- 
cause a compliance with them seemed to 
annihilate for a while the pain of absence, he 
entreated she would always think of him at 
sun-set. ' You will then meet me in thought,' 
said he : ' I shall constantly watch the sun- 
set ; and I shall be happy in the belief that 
your eyes are fixed upon the same object with 
mine, and that our minds are conversing. 
You know not, Emily, the comfort I promise 
myself from these moments ; but I trust you 
wUl experience it.' 

It is unnecessary to say with what emotion 
Emily, on this evening, watched the declining 
sun, over a long extent of plains, on which 
she saw it set without interruption, and sink 
towards the province which Valancourt in- 
habited. After this hour, her mind became 
far more tranquil and resigned than it had 
been since the marriage of Montoni and her 
aunt. 

During several days the travellers journeyed 
over the plains of Languedoc ; and then 
entering Dauphiny, and winding for some 
time among the mountains of that romantic 
province, they quitted their carriages and be- 
gan to ascend the Alps. And here such 
scenes of sublimity opened upon them, as no 
colours of language must dare to paint ! 
Emily's mind was even so much engaged with 
new and wonderful images, that they some- 
times banished the idea of Valancourt, though 
tjjey more frecjuently revived it. Thes^ brpugl^t 



to her recollection the prospects among the 
Pyrenees, which they had admired together, 
and had believed nothing could excel in 
grandeur. How often did she wish to ex* 
press to him the new emotions which this 
astonishing sceneiv awakened, and that he 
could par^e of tnem ! Sometimes too she 
endeavoured to anticipate his remarks, and 
almost imagined him present. She seemed 
to have arisen into another world, and to 
have left every trifling thought, every trifling 
sentiment, in that below : those only of 
grandeur and sublimity now dilated her mind, 
and elevated the affections of her heart. 

With what emotions of sublimity, softened 
by tenderness, did she meet Vakincourt in 
thought, at the customary hour of sim-set, 
when, wandering among the Alps, she watched 
the glorious orb sink amidst their summits, 
his last tints die away on their snowy points, 
and a solemn obscurity steal over the scene ! 
and when the last gleam had faded, she 
turned her eyes from the west with somewhat 
of the melancholy regret that is experienced 
after the departure of a beloved friend ; while 
these lonely feelings were heightened by the 
spreading gloom, and by the low soimds 
heard only when darkness confines attention, 
which made the general stillness more im- 
pressive — ^leaves shook by the air, the last of 
the breeze that lingers after sun-set, or the 
murmur of distant streams. 

During the first days of this journey among 
the Alps, the scenery exhibited a wonderful 
mixture of solitude and inhabitatio||| of cultiva- 
tion and barrenness. On the edge of tremen- 
dous precipices, and within the hollow of the 
cliffs, below which the clouds often floated, 
were seen villages, spires, and convent towers ; 
while green pastures and vineyards spread 
their hues at the feet of perpendicular rocks 
of marble or of granite, whose points, tufted 
with Alpine shrubs, or exhibiting only massy 
crags, rose above each other, till they termin- 
ated in the snowtopped mountains, whence the 
torrent fell that thundered along the valley. 

The snow was not yet melted on the sum- 
mit of Mount Cenis, over which the travellers 
passed ; but Emily, as she looked upon its 
clear lake and extended plain, surrounded by 
broken cliffs, saw, in imagination, the verdant 
beauty it would exhibit when the snows should 
be gone, and the shepherds, leading up the 
midsummer flocks from Piedmont to pasture 
on its flowery summit, should add Arcadian 
figures to Arcadian landscape. 

As she descended on the Italian side, the 
precipices became still more tremendous, 
the prospects still more wild and majestic ; 
over which the shifting lights threw all the 
pomp of colouring. Emily delighted to ob- 
serve the snowy tops of the mountains under 
the passing influence of the day — blushing 
with mourning, glowing with the brightness 
of noon, or i\ist. \5nX<^'i ^^^2sx S^c&^xis^^^^^^^ 



B2 THB MYSTERIES OF UDOLBHO. 

ing. The haunt of man could now only be where the same melting blue tint seemed lo 

discovered by the simple hut of the shepherd unite earth and sky. 

and the hunter, or by the rough pine-bridge Madame Montoni only shuddered as she 
thrown across the torrent, to assist the latter looked down precipices near whose edges the 
in his chase of the chamois over crags, where chairmen trotted as lightly and swiftly, almost, 
but for this vestige of man, it would have as the chamois bounded ; and frote whidi 
been believed only the chamois or the wolf Emily, too, recoiled ; but with her fears were 
dared to venture. As Emily gazed upon one mingled such various emotions of delight, 
of these perilous bridges, with the cataract such admiration, astonishment, and awe, as 
foaming beneath it, some images came to her she had never exx)erienced before, 
mind, which she afterwards combined in the Meanwhile, the carriers, having come to a 
following landing-place, stopped to rest ; and the tra- 
crrkDTTTr* crki^MiTT vellers being seated on the point of a diff. 
STORIED bONNE 1 . Momoni and Cavigni renewed a dispute con- 
The weary traveller, who all night long ceming Hannibal's passage over the Alps- 
Has climb'd among the Alps' tremendous steeps, Montoni contending that he entered Italy by 
Skirting the pathless precipice, where throng ^ j^ ^ (. j ^ Cavigni, that hc 
Wild forms of danger ; as he onward creeps, ^^-j ^ -1^ » o* r»,v— — « t'iL ...i,:..^ 
in chance, his aniious eye at distance sees Passed over Mount St. Bemaid. The subject 
The mountain-shepherd's solitary home brought to Emily s imagmation the disasters 
Peeping from forth the moon-illumined trees, he had suftered in this bold and perilous ad- 
What sudden transports to his bosom come I venture. She saw his vast amues windiog 
But if between some hideous chasm yawn, among the defiles, and over the tremendoos 

X'dr'^^uin^'^n^cron *: bri^^^^^^^^^ f«^J the mountains, which at Tdghrw«e 

He stands, and views, in the faint rays, lighted up by his fires, or by the tOtTAeS 

Far, far below the torrent's rising surge, which he caused to be earned when he 

And listens to the wild impetuous roar ; pursued his indefatigable march. In the dft 

Still eyes the depth, still shudders on the verge, of fancy, she perceived the gleam of arms 

Fears to return, nor dares to venture o'er , through the duskiness of night, the glitter of 

S^SS^^^pS^lit^ilSrh^eS-^^^^^^^^ spears%nd helmets and the banne^^flcx^ting 
•^ dimly on the twilight ; while now and then the 

Emily, often as she travelled among the blast of a distant trumpet echoed along the 
clouds, watched in silent awe their billoNvy defile, and the signal was answered br a mo- 
surges rolling below : sometimes, wholly closing mentary clash of arms. She looked with horror 
upon the scene, they appeared like a world of upon the mountaineers perched on the higlter 
chaos ; an# at others, spreading thinly, they clifts, assailing the troops below with broken 
opened and admitted partial catches of the fragments of the mountain ; on soldiers and 
landscape — the torrent, whose astounding roar elephants tumbling headlong down the lower 
had never failed, tumbling down the rocky precipices : and, as she listened to the re- 
chasm, huge cliffs, white with snow, or the dark bounding rocks that followed their fall, the 
summits of the pine forests that stretched mid- terrors of fancy yielded to those of reality, 
^vay down the mountains. But who may de- and she shuddered to behold herself on the 
scribeherrapture.whcn, having passed through dizzy height whence she had pictured the 
a sea of vapour, she caught a first view of Italy ; descent of others. 

when, from the ridge of one of those tremen- Madame Montoni, meantime, as she looked 
dous precipices that hang.upon Mount Cenis upon Italy, was contemplating, in imagination, 
and guard the entrance of that enchanting the splendour of palaces, and the grandeur of 
country, she looked down through the lower castles, such as she believed she was going to 
clouds, and, as they floated away, saw the be mistress of at Venice and in the Apennine ; 
grassy vales of Piedmont at her feet, and be- and she became, in idea, little less than a 
yond, the plains of Lombardy extending to princess. Being no longer under the alarms 
the furthest distance, at which appeared, on which had deterred her from giving entertain- 
the faint horizon, the doubtful towers of ments to the beauties of Thoulouse, whom 
Turin. Montoni had mentioned with more ecldt to 

The solitary grandeur of the objects that his own vanity than credit to their discretion 
immediately surrounded her — the mountain or regard to truth, she determined to give con- 
region towering above ; the deep precipices certs, though she had neither ear nor taste for 
that fell beneath ; the waving blackness of the music ; conversazione, though she had no 
forests of pine and oak, which skirted their talents for conversation ; and to outvie, if pos- 
feet, or hung within their recesses ; the head- sible, in the gaieties of her parties, and the 
long torrents that, dashing among their cliffs, magnificence of her liveries, all the noblesse of 
sometimes appeared like a cloud of mist, at Venice. This blissful reverie w'as somewhat 
others like a sheet of ice— these were features obscured, when she recollected the signor, her 
which received a higher character of sublimity husband, who, though he was not averse to 
from the reposing beauty of the Italian land- the profit which sometimes results from such 
scape beloWf stretching to the wide horizon, pailies, ^^ «\>«^.'^^ ^•orwii ^ wpdx«cm^\ of the 



THE MYSTRRiBS OP UDOLPHO, 6p 

frivolous parade that sometimes attends them ; the surrounding landscape charmed her no 

till she considered that his pride might be more. 

gratified I7 displaying among his own friends, The travellers, passing Novalcsa, reached, 

in his own city, the wealth which he had after the evening had closed, the smaU and 

neglected in France ; and she courted again ancient town of Susa, which had formerly 

the splettdid 'illusions that had charmed her guarded this pass of the Alps into Piedmont, 

before. The heights which comnumd it, had, since 

The travellers, as they descended, gradually the mvcntion of artillery, rendered its fortifica- 

exchanged the region of winter for £e genial tions useless ; but these romantic hcightSi 

warmth and beauty of spring. The sky began seen by moon-light, with the to^vn below sur- 

to assume that serene and beautiful tint pecu^ rounded by its walls and watch towers, and 

liar to the dimate of Italy ; patches of young partially illumined, exhibited an interesting 

verdure, fragrant shrubs and flowers, looked picture to Emily. Here they rested for the 

gaily among the rocks, often fringing their night, at an inn which had little acconmioda- 

rugged brows, or hanging in tufts from their tion to boast of ; but the travellers brought 

broken sides ; and the buds of the oak and with them the hunger that gives dehcious 

mountain-ash were expanding into foUage. flavour to the coarsest viands, and the weari- 

Desoen<Ung lower, the orange and the myrtle ness that ensures repose ; and here Emily first 

every now and then appeared in some sunny caught a strain of Italian music on Italian 

nook, with their yellow blossoms peeping ground. As she sat, after supper, at a httlc 

from among the dark green of their leaves, window that opened upon the country, ob- 

and mingling with the scarlet flowers of the serving an efiect of the moon-light on the 

pomegranate and the paler ones of the ar- broken surface of the mountains, and re- 

butus, that ran manthng to the crags above ; membering that on such a night as this she 

while, lower still, spread the pastures of Pied- once had sat with her father and Valancourt 

inont, where early flocks were cropping the resting upon a cliff of the P>Tcnees, she heard 

luxuriant herbage of spring. from below the long-drawn notes of a violin. 

The river Doria, which, rising on the sum- of such tone and deUcacy of expression a9 
mit of Mount Ccnis, had dashed for many harmonized exactly with the tender emotions 
leagues over the precipices that bordered the she was indulging, and both charmed and 
road, now began to assume a less impetuous, surprised her. Cavigni, wlio approached the 
though scarcely less romantic character, as it window, smiled at her surprise. * This is 
approached the green valleys of Piedmont, nothing extraordinary,' said he; 'you will 
into which the travelers descended with the hear the same, perhaps, at every inn in our 
evening sun ; and Emily found herself once way. It is one of our landlordfs family who 
more amid the tranquil beauty of pastoral plays, I doubt not.' Emily, as she listened, 
scenery ; among flocks and hercfs, and slopes thought he could be scarcely less than a pro- 
tufted with woods of Uvely verdure, and with fessor of music whom she heard ; and the 
beautiful shrubs, such as she had often seen sweet and plaintive strains soon lulled her into 
waving luxuriantly over the Alps above. The a reverie ; from which she was very unwiU- 
verdure of the pasturage, now varied with the ingly roused by the raillery of Cavigni, and 
hues of early flowers, among which were yel- by the voice of Montoni, who gave orders to 
low ranunculuses and pansy violets of dehcious a servant to have the carriages ready at an 
fragrance, she had never seen excelled.— early hour on the following morning, and 
Emily almost wished to become a peasant of added, that he meant to dine at Turin. 
Piedmont, to inhabit one of the pleasant em- Madame Montoni was exceedingly rejoiced 
bowered cottages which she saw peeping to be once more on level ground ; and after 
beneath the cliffs, and to pass her careless giving a long detail of the various terrors she 
hours among these romantic landscapes. To had suffered, which she forgot that she was 
the hours, the months, she was to pass under describing to the companions of her dangers, 
the domain of Montoni she locked with appre- she add^ a hope that she should soon be 
bension ; while those which were departed she beyond the view of these horrid mountains, 
remembered with regret and sorrow. ' Which all the world,' said she, 'should not 

In the present scenes her fancy often gave tempt me to cross again.' Complaining of 
her the figure of Valancourt, whom she saw fatigue, she soon retired to rest, and Emily 
on a point of the cliffs gazing with awe and withdrew to her own room ; when she under* 
admiration at the imagery around him : or stood from Annette, her aunt's woman, that 
wandering pensively along the vale below, Cavigni was nearly right in his conjecture 
frequently pausing to look back upon the concerning the musician who had awakened 
soenery ; and then, his countenance glowing the viohn with so much taste, for that he was 
with the poet's fire, pursuing his way to some the son of a peasant inhabiting the neigh- 
overhanging height. When she again con- bouring valley. ' He is going to the Carnival 
skloredue time and the distance that were to at Venice,' added Annette ; for the)r say he 
separate them, that every step she now took has a fine hand al •^\a:f«!»%» ^3cA ^«^ ^i?^ "^ 
l?p*^hened this distance, her heart sunk, and worVd oi moiiCH \ ajad*. >^^ C»x«>N'5^Na» "^cjiex 



84 



THE MVSTMHIES OF UDOLPHO. 



poing to begin ; but for my part, I should 
uke to live among these pleasant woods and 
hills, better than in a town ; and they say, 
Ma'amselle, we shall see no woods or hills, or 
fields, at Venice, for that it is built in the 
very middle of the sea.' 

Emily agreed with the talkative Aiinette, 
tha^ this young man was making a change for 
the worse ; and could not forbear silently la- 
menting that he should be drawn from the 
innocence and beauty of these scenes, to the 
corrupt ones of that voluptuous city. 

When she was alone, unable to sleep, the 
landscapes of her native home, with Valan- 
court, and the circumstances of her departure, 
haunted her fancy : she drew pictures of social 
happiness amidst the grand simplicity of 
nature, such as she feared she had bade 
farewell to for ever ; and then the idea of this 
young Piedmontese, thus ignorantly sporting 
with his happiness, returned to her thoughts ; 
and glad to escape a while from the pressure 
of nearer interests, she indulged her fancy in 
composing the following lines : 

THE PIEDMONTESE. 

Ah, merry swain I who laugh'd along the vales, 
And with your gay pipe made the mountains ring, 
whv leave your cot, your woods, and thj^iy gales. 
And friends beloved, for aught that wealth can 

bring I 
He goes to wake o'er moonlight seas the string— 
Venetian gold his untaught fancy hails ! 
Yet oft of home hislsimple carols sing, 
And hiB steps pause, as the last Alp he scales. 
Once more ne tfims to view his native scene — 
Far, far below, as roll the clouds away, 
Ke spies his cabin 'mid the pine-tops green, 
"Jihe well-known woods, clear brook, and pastures 

gay; 
And thinks of friends and parents left behind. 
Of sylvan revels,^ dance, and festive song ; 
And hears the faint reed swelling in the wind} 
And his sad sighs the distant notes prolong I 
Thus went the swain, till mountain-shadows fell. 
And dimm'd the landscape to his aching sight : 
And must he leave the vales he loves so well? 
Can foreign wealth, and shows, his heart delight ? 
No, happy vales ! your wild rocks still shall hear 
His pipe light sounding on the morning breeze ; 
Still shall he lead the flocks to streamlet clear. 
And watch at eve beneath the western trees. 
Away, Venetian gold— your charm is o'er I 
And now his swift step seeks the lowland bowers. 
Where, through the leaves, his cottage light once 

tnore^ 
Guides him to happy friends and jocund hours. 
Ah, merry swain I that laugh along the vales, 
And with your gay pipe make the mountains ring, 
Your cot, your wood, your thymy-scented gales. 
And friends beloved, more joy than wealth can 

bring. 



r;rK.;r. CHAPTER XVI. 

If you will patiently dance in our round. 
And see our moonlight revels, go with us. 
Mjdsummer Night's Dream. 

Sarlt on the following morning the travellers 



set out for Turin, The luxuriant plain that 
extends from the feet of the Alps to that mag- 
nificent city, was not then, as now, shaded by 
an avenue of trees nine miles in length ; but 
plantations of olives, mulberry, and palms, 
festooned with vines, mingled with the pas- 
toral scenery through which the rapid Po, 
after its descent from the mountains, wan- 
dered to meet the himible Doria at Turin. As 
they advanced towards the city, the Alps, 
seen at somo distance, began to appear in all 
their awful sublimity ; chain rising over chain 
in long succession, their higher points dark- 
ened by the hovering clouds, sometimes hid, 
and at others seen shooting up far above 
them ; while their lower steeps, broken into 
fantastic forms, were touched with blue and 
purplish tints, which, as they changed in 
light and shade, seemed to open new scenes 
to the eye. To the east stretched the plains 
of Lombardy, with the towers of Turin rising 
at a distance ; and beyond, the Apennines 
bounding the horizon. 

The general magnificence of that city, with 
its vistas of churches and palaces branching 
from the grand square, each opening to a 
landscape of the distant Alps or Apennines, 
was not only such as Emily had never seen in 
France, but such as she had never imagined. 

Montoni, who had been often at Turin, and 
cared little about views of any kind, did not 
comply with his wife's request that they might 
survey some of the palaces ; but staying only 
till the necessary refreshments could be ob- 
tained, they set forward for Venice with all 
possible rapidity. Montoni's manner during 
this journey was grave, and even haughty ; 
and towards Madame Montoni he was more 
especially reserved ; but it was not the reserve 
of respect, so much as of pride and discontent. 
Of Emily he took little notice. With Cavigni 
his conversations were commonly on poUtical 
or military topics, such as the convulsed 
state of their country rendered at this time 
particularly interesting. Emily observed that, 
at the mention of any daring exploit, Mon- 
toni's eyes lost their sullenness, and seemed 
instantaneously to gleam with fire ; yet they 
still retained somewhat of a lurking cunning, 
and she sometimes thought that their fire par- 
took more of the glare of malice than the 
brightness of valour, though the latter would 
well have harmonised with the high chivalric 
air of his figure, in which Cavigni, with all 
his gay and gallant manners, was his in- 
ferior. 

On entering the Milanese, the gentlemen 
exchanged their French hats for the Italian 
cap of scarlet cloth embroidered ; and Emily 
was somewhat surprised to observe that Mon- 
toni added to his the military plume, while 
Cavigni retained only the feather which was 
usually worn with such caps ; but she at 
length concluded that Montoni assumed this 
en^ga of a soldier for convenience, as a 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 85 

tte&fiS ti passing with more safety through a now stole by, and graduaUy strengthening as 
country overrun with parties of the military, the troops approached, Emily distinguished 
Over the beautiful plains of this country the drums and trumpets, with the dash of 
the devastations of war were frequently cymbals and of arms that were struck by a 
visible. Where the lands had not been suf- small party in time to the march, 
fered to lie uncultivated, they were often Montoni being now certain that these were 
tracked with the steps of the spoiler ; the the bands of the victorious Utaldo, leaned 
vines were torn down from the branches that from the carriage window, and hailed their 
had supported them, the oUves trampled upon general by waving his cap in the air, which 
the ground, and even the groves of mulberry- compliment the chief returned by raising his 
trees had been hewn by the enemy to light spear and then letting it down again suddenly, 
fires that destroyed the hamlets and villages while some of his officers, who were riding at 
of their owners. Emily turned her eyes with a distance from the troops, came up to the 
a sigh from these painful vestiges of conten- carriage and saluted Montoni as an old ac- 
tion, to the Alps of the Grison, that over- quaintance. The captain himself soon after 
looked them to the north, whose awful soli- arriving, his bands halted while he conversed . 
tudes seemed to offer to persecuted man a with Montoni, whom he appeared much re- 
secure asylum. joiced to see ; and from what he said, Emily 
The travellers frequently distinguished understood that this was a victorious army 
troops of soldiers moving at a distance : and returning into their own principaUty ; while 
they experienced at the little inns on the road the numerous waggons that accompanied 
the scarcity of provision^ and other incon- them contained the rich spoils of the enemy, 
veniences which are a part of the consequence their own wounded soldiers, and the prisoners 
of intestine war ; but they had never r^son to they had taken in battle, who were to be ran- 
be much alarmed for their immediate safety, somed when the peace, then negotiating 
and they passed on to Milan with little inter- between the neighbouring states, shoi^d be 
ruption of any kind, where they stayed not to ratified. The chiefs on the following day were 
survey the grandeur of the city, or even to to separate, and each taking his share of the 
view its vast cathedral which was then build- spoil was to return with his own band to his 
ing. castle. Tliis was therefore to be an evening 
Beyond Milan, the country wore the aspect of uncommon and general festivity, in com- 
of a ruder devastation ; and though every- memoration of the victory they had accom- 
thing seemed now quiet, the repose was like plished together, and of the farewell which 
that of death spread over features which retain the commanders were about to take of each 
the impression of the last convulsions. other. 

It was not till they had passed the eastern Emily, as these officers convCTSed with 
limits of the Milanese, that the travellers saw Montoni, observed with admiration, tinctured 
any troops since they had left Milan ; when, with awe, their high martial air, mingled with . 
as the evening was drawing to a close, they the haughtiness of the noblesse of those 
descried what appeared to be an army wind- days, and heightened by the gallantry of ihdr 
ing onward along the distant plains, whose dress, by the plumes towering on their caps, 
spears and other arms caught the last rays of the armorial coat, Persian sash, and ancient 
the sun. As the column advanced through a Spanish cloak. Utaldo, telling Montoni that 
part of the road contracted between two his army were going to encamp for the night 
hillocks, some of the commanders on horse- near a village at only a few miles distanc^i in- 
back were distinguished on a small eminence, vited him to turn back and partake of their 
pointing and making signals for the march ; festivity, assuring the ladies also, that they 
while several of the officers were riding along should be pleasantly accommodated : but 
the line, directing its progress according to the Montoni excused hiniself, adding, that it was 
signs communicated by those above ; and his design to reach Verona that evening ; and 
others, separating from the vanguard, which after some conversation concerning the state 
had emerged from the pass, were riding care- of the country towards that city, they parted, 
lessly along the plains at some distance to the The travellers proceeded without any inter- 
right of the army. ruption ; but it was some hours after sun-set 
As they drew nearer, Montoni, distinguish- before they arrived at Verona, whose beauti- 
ing the feathers that waved in their caps, and ful environs were therefore not seen by Emily 
the banners and liveries of the bands that till the following morning ; when, leaving that 
followed them, thought he knew this to be pleasant town at an early hour, they set off 
the small army commanded by the famous for Padua, where they embarked on the Brenta 
captain Utaldo, with whom, as well as with for Venice. Here the scene was entirely 
some of the other chiefs, he was personally changed ; no vestiges of war, such as had de- 
acquainted. He therefore gave orders that formed the plains of the Milanese, appeared ; 
the carriages should draw up by the side of on the contrary, all was peace and elegance^ 
the road, to await their arrival, and give them The verdant banks of the Brenta exhibited a 
the pass. A faint strain of martial music continued landscape of beauty, gaiety and 



86 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 



splendour. Emily gaaed with admiration on 
the villas of the Venetian noblesse, with their 
cool porticos and colonnades, overhung with 
poplars and cypresses* of majestic height and 
lively verdure ; on their rich orangeries, whose 
blossoms perfumed the air ; and on the luxu- 
riant willows, that dipped their light leaves in 
the wave, and sheltered from the sun the gay 
parties whose music came at intervals on the 
breeze. The Carnival did, indeed, appear to 
extend from Venice along the whole line of 
these enchanting shores; the river was gay 
with boats passing to that city, exhibiting the 
fantastic diversity of a masquerade in the 
dresses of the people within them ; and 
towards evening, groups of dancers frequently 
were seen beneath the trees. 

Oivigni meanwhile informed her of the 
names of the noblemen to whom the several 
villas they passed belonged, adding light 
sketches of their characters, such as served to 
amuse rather than to inform, exhibiting his 
own wit instead of the delineation of truth. 
Emily was sometimes diverted by his con- 
versation ; but his gaiety did not entertain 
Madame Montoni as it had formerly done ; 
she was frequently grave, and Montoni re- 
tained his usual reserve. 

Nothing could exceed Emily's admiration 
on her first view of Venice, with its islets, 
palaces, and towers rising out of the sea, 
whose clear surface reflected the tremulous 
picture in all its colours. The sun, sinking 
in the west, tinted the waves and the lofty 
mountains of Friuli, which skirt the northern 
shores of the Adriatic, with a saffron glow, 
while on the marble porticos and colonnades 
of St Mark were thrown the rich lights and 
shades of evening. As they glided on, the 
grander features of this city appeared more 
distinctly : its terraces, crowned with airy yet 
majestic fabrics, touched, as they now were, 
with the splendour of the setting sun, ap- 
peared as if they had been called up from the 
ocean by the wand of an enchanter, rather 
than reared by mortal hands. 

The sun, soon after, sinking to the lower 
world, the shadow of the earth stole gradually 
ovw the waves, and then up the towering 
sides Of the mountains of Friuli, till it ex- 
tinguished even the last upward beams that 
had lingered on their summits, and the melan- 
choly purple of evening drew over them like 
a thin veil. How deep, how beautiful was 
the tranquillity that wrapped the scene 1 All 
nature seemed to repose ; the finest emotions 
of the soul were alone awake. Emily's eyes 
filled with tears of admiratic»i and sublime 
devotion, as she raised them over the sleeping 
w^ld to the vast heavens, and heard the notes 
of solemn music that stole over the waters 
fmm a distance. She listened in still rapture, 
and no person of the party broke the charm 
by an inquiry. The sounds seemed tp grow" 
on the air; for 90 smoothily did the barge 



glide along, that its motion was not per** 
ceivable, and the feiry city appeared approach- 
ing to welcome the strangers. They now 
distinguished a female voice, accompanied by 
a few instruments, singing a soft and mourn- 
ful air and its fine expression, as sometimes it 
seemed pleading with the impassioned tender- 
ness of love, and then languishing into the 
cadence of hopeless grief, declared that it 
flowed from no feigned sensibility. * Ah I * 
thought Emily, as she sighed and remembered 
Valancourt, 'those strains come from the 
heart!' 

She looked round with anxious inquiry ; 
the deep twilight that had fallen over the 
scene, admitted only imperfect images to the 
eye, but at some distance on the sea she 
thought she perceived a gondola : a chorus 
of voices and instruments now swelled on the 
air — so sweet, so solemn 1 seemed like the 
hymn of angels descending through the 
silence of night ! Now it died away, and 
fancy almost beheld the holy choir reascend- 
ing towards heaven ; then again it swelled 
with the breeze, trembled awhile, and again 
died into silence. It brought to Emily's recol- 
lection some lines of her late fa.ther, and she 
repeated in a low voice, 

• . Ofk I hear, 

Upon the silence of the midnight air, 
Celestial voices swell in holy chorus. 
That bears the soul to heaven J' 

The deep stillness that succeeded was as 
expressive as the strain that had just ceased. 
It was uninterrupted for several minutes, till 
a general sigh seemed to release the company 
from their enchantment. Emily, however, 
long indulged the pleasing sadness that had 
stolen upon her spirits ; but the gay and busy 
scene that appeared, as the barge approached 
St Mark's Place, at length roused her atten- 
tion. The rising moon, which threw a 
shadowy light upon the terrace, and illumined 
the porticos and magnificent arcades that 
crowned them, discovered tlie various con)« ; 
pany, whose light steps, soft guitars, and 
softer voices, echoed through the colonades. ; 

The music they heard before now passed 
Montoni's barge in one of the gondolas, of 
which several were seen skimming along the 
moon-light sea, full of gay parties, catching 
the cool breeze. Most of these had music, 
made sweeter by the waves over which it 
floated, and by the measured sound of oars 
as they dashed the sparkling tide. Emily 
gazed, and listened, and thought herself in a 
fairy scene : even Madame Montoni was 
pleased ; Montoni congratulated himself on 
his return to Venice, which he called the first 
city in the world, and Cavigni was more gay 
and animated than ever. 

The barge passed on to the grand canal, 
where Montoni's mansion was situated. And 
here, other forms of beauty and ojf grandeur, . 
such as her imagination had never painted. 



THE MYSTERIES OF V DO LP HO. 87 

were nnfolded to Emily in the palaces of portico they stopped, and £mily distinguished 

Sansovino and Palladio, as she glided along the verses of Ariosto. They sung of me wars 

the waves. The air bore no sounds but those of the Moors against Charlemagne, and then 

of sweetness, echoing along each margin of of the woes of Orlando : afterwards the mca- 

the canal, and from gondolas on its surface, sure changed, and the melancholy sweetness 

while groups of masks were seen dancing on of Petrarch succeeded. The magic of his 

the moonlight terraces, and seemed almost grief was assisted by all that Italian expression, 

to realize the romance of fairy-land. heightened by the enchantments of Venetian 

The barge stopped before the portico of a moon-light, could give, 
large house, from whence a ser\'ant of Mon- Emily, as she listened, caught the pensive 

toni crossed the terrace, and immediately the enthusiasm ; her tears flowed sUently, while her 

party disembarked. From the portico they fancy bore her far away to France and to 

passed a noble hall to a staircase of marble, Valancourt. Each succeeding sonnet, more 

which led to a saloon fitted up in a style of full of charming sadness than the last, seemed 

magnificence that stuprised Emily. The walls to bind the spell of melancholy : with extreme 

and ceiling were adorned with historical and regret she saw the musicians move on, and 

allegorical paintings in fresco \ silver tripods, her attention followed the strain till the last 

depending from chains of the same metal, faint warble died in air. She then remained 

illumined the apartment, the floor of which sunk in that pensive tranquillity which soft 

was covered with Indian mats painted in a music leaves on the mind — a state hke that 

variety of colours and devices ; the couches produced by the view of a beautiful landscape 

and drapery of the lattices were of pale green by moonlight, or by the recollection of scenes 

silk, embroidered and fringed with green and marked with the tenderness of friends lost for 

gold. Balconylattices opened upon the grand ever, and with sorrows which time has md- 

canal, whence rose a confusion of voices and lowed into mild regret Such scenes are in- 

of musical instruments, and the breeze that deed, to the mind, like those faint traces 

gave freshness to the apartment. Emily, con- which the memory bears of music that is 

sidering the gloomy temper of Mon toni, looked past. 

upon the splendid furniture of his house with Other sounds soon awakened her attention : 

surprise, and remembered the report of his it was the solemn harmony of horns, that 

being a man of broken fortune, with astonish- swelled from a distance : and observing the 

ment. ' Ah ! ' said she to herself, ' if Valan- gondolas arrange themselves along the margin 

court could but see this mansion, what peace of the terraces, she threw on her veil, and, 

would it give him ! He would then be con- stepping into the balcony, discerned in the 

vinced that the report was groimdless.' distant perspective of the canal something 

Madame Montoni seemed to assume the like a procession floating on the light surfiELce 

airs of a princess ; but Montoni was restless of the water ; as it approached, the horns and 

and discontented, and did not even observe other instruments mingled sweetly ; and soon 

the civility of bidding her welcome to her after, the fabled deities of the city seemed to 

home. have arisen from the ocean ; for Neptune, with 

Soon after his arrival, he ordered his gon- Venice personified as his queen, came <» the 

dola, and, with Cavigni, went out to mingle undulating waves, surrounded by tritons and 

in the scenes of the evening. Madame then sea-nyrophs. The fantastic splendour «f this 

became serious and thoughtful. Emily, who spectacle, together with the grandeur of the 

was charmed with everything she saw, endea- surrounding palaces, appeared hke the vision 

voured to enliven her ; but reflection had not, of a poet suddenly embodied ; and the l^cifiil 

with Madame Montoni, subdued caprice and images which it awakened in Emily's mind, 

ill-humour ; and her answers discovered so lingered there long after the procession had 

much of both, that Emily gave up the attempt passed away. She indulged herself in imag^- 

of diverting her, and withdrew to a lattice, to ining what might be the manners and delights 

amuse herself with the scene without, so new of a sea-nymph, till' she almost wished to 

and so enchanting. throw off" the habit of mortality, and plunge 

The first object that attracted her notice was into the green wave to participate them, 
a group of dancers on the terrace below, led ' How delightful,' said she, 'to live amidst 

by a guitar and some other instruments. The the coral bowers and crystal caverns of the 

girl who struck the guitar, and another who ocean, with my sister nymphs, and listen to 

flourished the tamborine, passed on in a dan- the sounding waters above, and to the soft 

cing step, and with a light grace and gaiety of shells of the tritons ! and then, after sun-set, 

heart that would have subdued the goddess of to skim on the surface of the waves, round 

spleen in her worst humour. Alter these wild rocks, and along sequestered shores, 

came a group of fantastic figures, some dressed where perhaps, some pensive wanderer comes 

as gondolieri, others as minstrels, while others to weep ! Then would I soothe his s(XT0W5 

seemed to defy all description. They sung in with my sweet music, and offer him from a 

parts, their voices accompanied by a few soft shell some of the delicious fruit that hasv^^ 

instruments. At a httle distance from the round Nel^X\ma'^^^^s5J::ftC 



88 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



She was recalled from her reverie to a mere 
mortal supper, and could not forbear smiling 
at the fancies she had been indulging, and at 
her conviction of the serious displeasure which 
Madame Montoni would have expressed, 
could she have been made acquainted with 
them. 

After supper, her aunt sat late ; but Mon- 
toni did not return, and she at length retired 
to rest. If Emily had admired the magnifi- 
cence of the saloon, she was not less surprised 
on observing the half-furnished and forlorn 
appearance of the apartments she passed in 
the way to her chamber, whither she went 
through long suits of noble rooms, that 
seemed, from their desolate aspect, to have 
been unoccupied for many years. On the 
walls of some were the faded remains of 
tapestry ; from others painted in fresco, the 
damps had almost withdrawn both colours 
and design. At length she reached her own 
chamber, spacious, desolate, and lofty, like 
the rest, with high lattices that opened towards 
the Adriatic. It brought gloomy images to 
her mind ; but the view of the Adriatic soon 
gave her others more airy, among which was 
that of the sea-nymph, whose delights she had 
before amused herself with picturing; and 
anxious to escape from serious reflections, 
she now endeavoured to throw her fanciful 
ideas into a train, and concluded the hour 
with composing the following lines : 

THE SEA-NYMPH. 

Down, down a thousand fathom deep. 
Among the sounding seas I go ; 
Play round the foot of every steep 
Whose cliffs above the ocean grow. 

There, within their secret caves, 

I hear the mighty rivers roar ! 

And guide their streams through Neptune's waves. 

To bless the green earth's inmost shore : 

And bid the freshen'd water's glide, 
Jo»" fern-crown'd nymphs, of lake or brook, 
Through winding woods and pastures wide. 
And many a wild, romantic nook. 

For this the nymphs at fall of eve 
Oft dance upon the flowery banks. 
And sing my name, and garlands weave 
To bear beneath the wave their thanks. 

In coral bowers I love to lie, 
And hear the surges roll above. 
And through the waters view on high 
The proud ships sail, and gay clouds move. 
And oft at midnight's stillest hour. 
When summer seas the vessel lave 
I love to prove my charmful power 
While floating on the moonlight wave. 

A^d S'i%"J?P ^'^^'P ^^*^ ^'■«^ l>as bound, 
OVr th! 1^ """^^ mn^ms leans 
?Moh «. ^-^^P ^ ^'^^' I breathe around 
Such strams as speak no mortal means ! 

Se^i bm?h?v"srem' ^T^^^"^ -Y- 



Sometimes a »ngle note I swell,^ 
TYtSiX, softly sweet, at distance dies ! 
Then wake the magic of my shell. 
And choral voices round me rise i 

The trembling youth, charm'd by my strain. 
Calls up the crew, who, silent, bend 
O'er the high deck, but list in vain ; 
My song is hush'd, my wonders end 1 

Within the mountain's woody bay. 
Where the tall bark at anchor rides, 
At twilight hour, with tritons gay 
I dance upon the lapsing tides I 

And with my sister-nymphs I sport, 
Till the broad sun looks o'er the floods ; 
Then swift we seek our crystal court, 
Deep in the wave, 'mid Neptune's woods. 

In cool arcades and grassy halls 
We pass the sultry hours of noon, 
Beyond wherever sunbeam falls. 
Weaving sea-flowers in gay festoon. 

The while we chant our ditties sweet 
To some soft shell that warbles iiear; 
Join'd by the murmuring currents, fleet. 
That glide along our halls so clear. 

There the pale pearl and sapphire blue. 
And ruby red, and emerald green. 
Dart from the domes a changing hue. 
And sparry columns deck the scene. 

When the dark storm scowls o'er the deep, 
And long, long peals of thunder sound, 
On some high clifi* my watch I keep 
O'er all the resdess seas around : 

Till on the ridgy wave afar 
Comes the lone vessel, labouring slow. 
Spreading the white foam in the air, 
With sail and topmast bending low. 

Then, plunge I 'mid the ocean's roar. 
My way by quivering lightnings shown. 
To guide the bark to peaceful shore, 
And hush the sailor's fearful groan. 

And if too late I reach its side 

To save it from the 'whelming surge, 

I call my dolphins o'er the tide, 

To bear the crew where isles emerge. 

Their mournful spirits soon I cheer. 
While round the desert coast I go. 
With warbled songs they faintly hear. 
Oft as the stormy gust sinks low. 

My music leads to lofty groves, 

That wild upon the sea-bank wave ; 

Where sweet fruits bloom, and fresh spring roves. 

And closing boughs the tempest brave. 

Then, from the air spirits obey. 
My potent voice they love so well. 
And on the clouds paint visions gay, 
While strains more sweet at distance swell. 
And thus the lonely hours I cheat. 
Soothing the shipwreck'd sailor's heart, 
Till from the waves the storms retreat. 
And o'er the east the day-beams dart. 

Neptune for this oft binds me fast 
To rocks below, with coral chain. 
Till all the tempest's overpast. 
And drowning seamen cry in vain* 

Whoe'er ye are that love my lay, 
Come when red sunset tints the wave. 
To the still sands, where fairies play ; 
There, in cool seas, I love to lave. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



89 



CHAPTER XVII. 

' lie is a great observer, and he looks 
Quite through the deeds of men : he loves no 
plays, 

he hears no music ; 

Seldom he smiles ; and smiles in such a sort. 
As if he mock'd himself, and scom'd his spirit 
That could be moved to smile at anything. 
Such men as he be never at heart's ease, 
"When they behold a greater than themselves.* 

Julius CiCSAR. 

MoNTONi and his companion did not return 
home till many hours after the dawn had 
blushed upon the Adriatic. The airy groups 
which had danced all night along the colon- 
nade of St. Mark, dispersed before the morur 
ing like so many spirits. Montoni had been 
otherwise engaged ; his soul was little sus- 
ceptible of light pleasures. He delighted in 
the energies of the passions ; the difficulties 
and tempests of life, which wreck the hap- 
piness of others, roused and strengthened all 
the powers of his mind, and afforded him 
the highest enjoyments of which his nature 
was capable. Without some object of strong 
interest, life was to him little more than a 
sleep ; and when pursuits of real interest 
failed, he substituted artificial ones, till habit 
changed their nature, and they ceased to be 
unreal. Of this kind was the habit of gaming 
which he had adopted, first, for the purpose 
of relieving him from the languor of inaction, 
but had since pursued with the ardour of 
passion. In this occupation he had passed 
the night with Cavigni, and a party of young 
men who had more money than rank and 
more vice than either. Montoni despised the 
greater part of these for the inferiority of their 
talents rather than for their vicious inclina- 
tions, and associated with them only to make 
them the instruments of his purposes. Among 
these, however, were some of superior abiUties, 
and a few whom Montoni admitted to his 
intimacy ; but even towards these he still 
preserved a decisive and haughty air, which, 
while it imposed submission on weak and 
timid minds, roused the fierce hatred of 
strong ones. He had, of course, many and 
bitter enemies ; but the rancour of their 
hatred proved the degree of his power ; and 
as power was his chief aim, he gloried more 
in such hatred than it was possible he could 
in being esteemed. A feeling so tempered as 
that of esteem, he despised, and would have 
despised himself also had he thought himself 
capable of being flattered by it 

Among the few whom he distinguished were 
the Signors Bertolini, Orsino, and Verezzi. 
The first was a man of gay temper, strong 
passions, dissipated, and of unbounded extra- 
vagance, but generous, brave, and imsus- 
picious. Orsino was reserved and haughty ; 
loving power more than ostentation ; of a 
cruel and suspicious temper ; quick to feel an 
injury, and relentless in avenging it ; cunmng 



and unsearchable in contrivance, patient and 
indefatigable in the execution of his schemes. 
He had a perfect command of featiwc and of 
his passions, of which he had scarcely any, 
but pride, revenge, and avarice ; and in the 
gratification of these, few considerations had 
power to restrain him, few obstacles to with- 
stand the depth of his stratagems. This 
man was the chief favourite of Montoni. 
Verezzi was a man of some talent, of fiery 
imagination, and the slave of alternate pas- 
sions. He was gay, voluptuous, and daring ; 
yet had neither perseverance nor true courage, 
and \vas meanly selfish in all his aims. Quidc 
to form schemes, and sanguine in his hope of 
success, he was the first to undertake, and to 
abandon, not onlv his own plans, but those 
adopted from other persons. Proud and 
impetuous, he revolted against all subordi- 
nation ; yet those who were acquainted with 
his character, and watched the turn of his 
passions, could lead him like a child. 

Such were the friends whom Montoni intro- 
duced to his family and his table, on the day 
after his anival at Venice, There were also 
of the party a Venetian nobleman. Count 
Morano, and a Signora Livona, whom Mon- 
toni had introduced to his wife as a lady of 
distinguished merit, and who, having called' 
in the morning to welcome her to Venice, had 
been requested to be of the dinner party. 

Madame Montoni received with a very ill 
grace the comphments of the signors. She 
disliked them, because they were the friends of 
her husband ; hated them, because she believed 
they had contributed to detain him abroad 
till so late an hour of the preceding morning ; 
and envied them, since, conscious of her own 
want of influence, she was convinced that he 
preferred their society to her own. The rank 
of Count Morano procured him that distinction 
which she refused to the rest of the company. 
The haughty sullenness of her countenance 
and manner, and the ostentatious extra- 
vagance of her dress, for she had not yet 
adopted the Venetian habit, were strikingly 
contrasted by the beauty, modesty, sweetness, 
and simplicity of Emily, who observed with 
more attention than pleasure the party around 
her. The beauty and fascinating mariners 
of Signora Livona, however, won her invo- 
luntary regard ; while the sweetness of her 
accents, and her air of gentle kindness, 
awakened with Emily those pleasing affections 
which so long had slumbered. 

In the cool of the evening the party em- 
barked in Montoni's gondola, and rowed out 
upon the sea. The red glow of sun-set. 
still touched the waves, and lingered in the 
west, where the melancholy gleam seemed 
slowly expiring, while the dark blue of the 
upper ether began to twinkle with stars* 
Emily sat, given up to pensive and sweet 
emotions. The smoothness of the water over 
which she glided, its rejected iin^ges— « new 



^ 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



heaven and trembling stars below the waves, 
with shadowy outlines of towers and porticos 
—conspired with the stillness of the hour, 
interrupted only by the passing wave or the 
notes of distant music, to raise those emotions 
to enthusiasm. As she listened to the mea- 
sured sound of the oars, and to the remote 
warblngs that came in the breeze, her 
softened mind returned to the memory of 
St Aubert and to Valancourt, and tears stole 
to her eyes* The ra\-s of the moon, strength- 
ening as the shadows deepened, soon after 
threw a silvery gleam upon her countenance, 
which was partly shaded by a thick black veil, 
and touched it with inimitable softness. Hers 
was the contour of a Madonna, with the sensi- 
bility of a Magdalen ; and the pensive uplifted 
eye, with the tear that ghttered on her cheek, 
confirmed the expression of the character. 

The last strain of distant music now 
died in air» for the gondola was far upon the 
waves, and the party determined to have 
music of their own. The Count Morano, 
who sat next to Emily, and who had been ob- 
serving her for some time in silence, snatched 
up a lute, and struck the chords with the 
finger of harmony herself, while his voice, a 
fine tenor, accompanied them in a* rondeau 
full of tender sadness. To him, indeed, 
might have been appUed that beautiful ex- 
hortation of an Enghsh poet, had it then 
existed : 

* Strike up, my master. 

But touch the strings with a religious softness ! 
Teach sounds to languish through the night's dull 

ear 
Till Melancholy starts from off her couch, 
And Carelessness grows convert to Attention.' 

With such powers of expression the Coimt 
sung the following 

RONDEAU. 

Soft as yon silver ray, that sleeps 
Upon the ocean's trembling tide ; 
Soft as the air, that lightly sweeps 
Yon sail, that swells in stately pride : 
Soft as the surge's stealing note, 
That dies along the distant shores. 

Or warbled strain, that sinks remote 

So soft the sigh my bosom pours 1 
True as the wave to Cynthia's ray. 
True as the vessel to the breeze. 
True as the soul to music's sway. 
Or music to Venetian seas : 
Soft as yon silver beams, that sleep 
Upon the ocean's trembling breast ; 
So soft, so true, fond Love shall weep. 
So soft, so true, with thee shall rest. 

The cadence with which he returned from 
the last stanza to a repetitou of the first ; the 
JP® "Modulation in which his voice stole upon 
whioS^^! ^^' ^^ ^^® pathetic energy with 
onlv^vi P^°oounced tlie last, were such as 
cSri^cSr^if '^^^ ^°^''' Sive. When he had 
Emily ^i *^® S^^® ^^ 1^^'e with a sigh to 
J'* wao, to avoid any appearance of 



affectation, immediately began to play. She 
sung a melancholy httle air, one of the popular 
songs of her native province, with a simphcity 
and pathos that made it enchanting. But its 
well-known melody brought so forcibly to her 
fancy the scenes and the persons among 
which she had often heard it, that her spirits 
were overcome, her voice trembled and ceased 
— and the strings of the lute were struck with 
a disordered hsmd ; till, ashamed of the emo- 
tion she had betrayed, she suddenly passed on 
to a song so gay and airy, that the steps of 
the dance seemed almost to echo to the notes. 
' Bravissimo /' burst instantly from the lips of 
her dehghted auditors, and she was compelled 
to repeat the air. Among the compliments 
that followed, those of the count were not the 
least audible ; and they had not concluded 
when Emily gave the instrument to ^gnora 
Livona, whose voice accompanied it with true 
Itahan taste. 

Afterwards, the count, Emily, Cavigni, and 
the signora simg canzaneftes, accompanied by 
a couple of lutes and a few other instruments. 
Sometimes the instruments suddenly ceased, 
and the voices dropped fi-om the full swell of 
harmony into a low chant ; then, afta- a deep 
pause, they rose by degrees, the instnmfients 
one by one striking up, till the loud and full 
chorus soared again to heaven I 

Meanwhile Montoni, who was weary of this 
harmony, was considering how he might dis- 
engage himsdf from his party, or withdraw 
wiSi such of it as would be willing to play, to 
a casino. In a pause of the music he pro- 
posed returning to shore ; a proposal which 
Orsino eagerly seconded, but which the count 
and the oUier gentlemen as warmly opposed. 

Montoni still meditated how he might ex- 
cuse himself from longer attendance upon the 
count, for to him only he thought excuse 
necessary, and how he might get to land, till 
the gondolieri of an empty boat returning to 
Venice hailed his people. Without troubling 
himself longer about an excuse, he seized this 
opportunity of going thither ; and committing 
the ladies to the care of his friends, departed 
with Orsino, while Emily, for the first time, 
saw him go with regret : for she considered 
his presence a protection, though she knew 
not what she should fear. He landed at St. 
Mark's, and hurrying to a casino, was soon 
lost amidst a crowd of gamesters. 

Meanwhile the count having secretly dis- 
patched a servant in Montoni's boat for his 
own gondola and musicians, Emily heard, 
without knowing his project, the gay song of 
gondolieri approaching, as they sat on the 
stem of the boat, aSd saw the tremulous 
gleam of the moon-l^ht wave, which their 
oars disttttbed. Presentlr she heard the 
sound of instruments, and then a full sym- 
jAony swelled on ihe air ; and the boats meet- 
ing, thegondoheri hailed each other. The count 
then explaining himself, the party removed 



THE MYSTEFIES OF UDOLPHO. 91 

into his gondola, which was embellished with broad sun rising out of the Adriatic, while 
all that taste could bestow. St Marie's Place was yet crowded with corn- 
While they partook of a collation of fruits pany. Sleep had long weighed heavily on her 
and ice, the whole band, follo^^^ng at a distance eyes ; but now the fresh sea breeze revived 
in the other boat, played the most sweet and her, and she would have quitted the soe&e 
enchanting strains ; and the count, who had with regret, had not the count been present, 
again seated himself by Emily, paid her un- performing the duty which he had imposed 
remitted attention ; and sometimes in a low upon himself, of escorting them home, 
but impassioned voice, uttered compliments There they heard that Montoni was not yet 
she could not misunderstand. To avoid them returned ; and his wife retiring in displeasure 
she conversed with Signora Livona, and her to her apartment, at length released Emily 
manner to the count assumed a mild reserve, from the fatigue of further attendance, 
which, though dignified, was too gentle to re- Montoni came home late in the morning, 
press his assiduities ; he could see, hear, speak in a very ill humour, having lost considerably 
to no person but Emily ; while Cavigni ob- at play ; and before he withdrew to rest had a 
served him now and then with a look of private conference with Cavigni, whose manner 
displeasure, and Emily, with one of uneasi- on the following day seemed to tell that the 
ness. She now wished for nothing so much subject of it had not been pleasing to him. 
as to return to Venice : but it was near mid- In the evening Madame Montoni, who 
night before the gondolas approached St. during the day had observed a sullen silence 
Mark's place, where the voice of gaiety and towards her husband, received visits from 
song was loud. The busy hum of mingling some Venetian ladies, with whose sweet 
sounds was heard at a considerable distance manners Emily was particulariy charmed, 
on the water ; and had not a bright moon- They had an air of ease and kindness towards 
light discovered the city, with its terraces and the strangers, as if they had been their familiar 
towers, a stranger would almost have credited friends for years ; and their conversation was 
the fabled wonders of Neptune's court, and by turns tender, sentimental, and gay. 
believed that the tumult arose from beneath Madame, though she had no taste for such 
the waves. conversation, and whose coarseness and 
They landed at St. Mark's, where the selfishness sometimes exhibited a ludicrous 
gaiety of the colonnades and the beauty of the contrast to their excessive refinement, could 
night made Madame Montoni willingly submit not remain wholly insensible to the captiva- 
te the count's solicitations to join the pro- tions of their manner, 
menade, and afterwards to take a supper with In a pause of conversation, a lady who 
the rest of the party at his casino. If any- was called Signora Herminia took up a lute, 
thing could have dissipated Emily's uneasi- and began to play and sing with as much 
ness, it would have been the grandeur, gaiety, easy gaiety as if she had been alone. Her 
and novelty of the surrounding scene, adorned voice was uncommonly rich in tone and 
with Palladio's palaces, and busy with parties various in expression ; yet she appeared to be 
of masqueraders. entirely unconscious of its powers, and meant 
At length they withdrew to the casino, nothing less than to display them. She sung 
which was fitted up with infinite taste, and from the gaiety of her heart, as she sat with 
where a splendid banquet was prepared. But her veil half thrown back, holding grace^illy 
. here Emily's reserve made the coimt perceive the lute, under the spreading foliage and 
that it was necessary for his interest to win flowers of some plants that rose from baskets 
the favour of Madame Montoni, which, from and interiaced one ofthe lattices of the saloon. 
the condescension she had already shown to Emily, retiring a little from the company, 
him, appeared to be an achievement of no sketched her figure, with the miniature scenery 
great difficulty. He transferred, therefore, around her, and drew a very interesting pic- 
part of his attention from Emily to her aunt, ture, which, though it would not perhaps 
who felt too much flattered by the distinction have borne criticism, had spirit and taste 
even to disguise her emotion ; and before the enough to awaken both the fancy and the 
party broke up, he had entirely engaged the heart. When she had finished it, she presented 
esteem of Madame Montoni. Whenever he it to the beautiful original, who was delighted 
addressed her, her ungracious countenance re- with the offering, as well as the sentiment it 
laxcd into smiles, and to whatever he proposed conveyed, and assured Emily, with a smile oi 
she assented. He invited her with the rest of captivating sweetness, that she should preserve 
the party to take coffee in his box at the opera it as a pledge of her friendship, 
on the following evening ; and Emily heard In the evening Cavigni joined the ladies, 
the invitation accepted, with strong anxiety but Montoni had other engagements; and 
concerning the means of excusing herself they embarked in the gondola for St. Mark's, 
from attending Madame Montoni thither. where the same gay company seemed to flutter 
It was very late before their gondola was as on the preceding night. The cool breeze, 
ordered ; and Emily's suiprise was extreme, the glassy sea, the gentle sound of its vra.v<^^ 
\vhcn, on quitting the casino, she beheld the and \,l;^c ?w^\.^x \cwsm\>x oil ^^kNasx-asas^RN 



92 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



the lofty porticos and arcades, and the happy 
groups that sauntered beneath them ; these, 
with every feature and circumstance of the 
scene, united to charm Emily, no longer 
teased by the officious attentions of Count 
Morano. But as she looked upon the moon- 
light sea undulating along the walls of St. 
Mark, and, Ungering for a moment over those 
walls, caught the sweet and melancholy song 
of some gondoher as he sat in his boat below 
waiting for his master, her softened mind 
returned to the memory of her home, of her 
friends, and of all that was dear in her native 
country. 

After walking some time, they sat down at 
the door of a casino : and while Cavigni was 
accommodating them with coffee and ice, were 
joined by Count Morano. He sought Emily 
with a look of impatient delight, who, remem- 
bering all the attention he had shown her on 
the preceding evening, was compelled, as 
before, to shrink from his assiduities into a 
timid reserve, except when she conversed with 
Signora Herminia and the other ladies of her 
party. 

It was near midnight before they withdrew 
to the opera, where Emily was not so charmed 
but that, when she remembered the scene she 
had just quitted, she felt how infinitely inferior 
all the splendour of art is to the sublimity of 
nature. Her heart was not now affected, tears 
of admiration did not start to her eyes, as when 
she viewed the vast expanse of ocean, the 
grandeur of the heavens, and listened to the 
rolling waters, and to the faint music that at 
intervals mingled with their roar. Remem- 
bering these, the scene before her faded into 
insignificance. 

Of the evening, which passed on without 
any particular incident, she wished the con- 
clusion, that she might escape from the atten- 
tions of the count ; and as opposite qualities 
frequently attract each other in our thoughts, 
thus Emily, when she looked on Count 
Morano, remembered Valancourt, and a sigh 
sometimes followed the recollection. 

Several weeks passed in the course of cus- 
tomary visits, during which nothing remark- 
able occurred. Emily was amused by the 
manners and scenes that surrounded her, so 
different from those of France, but where 
Count Morano, too frequently for her com- 
fort, contrived to introduce himself. His 
manner, figure, and accomplishments, which 
were generally admired, Emily would perhaps 
have admired also, had her heart been dis- 
engaged from Valancourt, and had the count 
forborne to persecute her with officious atten- 
tions, during which she observed some traits 
in his character that prejudiced her against 
whatever might otherwise be good in it. 

Soon after his arrival at Venice, Montoni 

received a packet from M. Quesnel, in which 

the latter mentioned the^death of his wife's 

imde, at bis vilh on the Breata ; aad ;\xat, m 



consequence of this event, he should hasten 
to take possession of that estate and of other 
effects bequeathed to him. This uncle was 
the brother of Madame Quesnel's late mother; 
Montoni was related to her by the fatl^r's 
side ; and though he could have had neither 
claim nor expectation concerning these posses- 
sions, he could scarcely conceal the envy which 
M. Quesnel's letter excited. 

Emily had observed with concern, that, 
since they left France, Montoni had not even 
afiected kindness towards her aunt, and that, 
after treating her, at first, with neglect, he 
now met her with uniform ill-humour and 
reserve. She had never supposed that her 
aunt's foibles could have escaped the discern- 
ment of Montoni, or that her mind or figure 
were of a kind to deserve his attention. Her 
surprise, therefore, at this match had been ex- 
treme ; but since he had made the choice, she 
did not suspect that he would so openly have 
discovered his contempt of it. But Montoni, 
who had been allured by the seeming wealth 
of Madame Cheron, was now severely dis- 
appointed by her comparative poverty, and 
highly exasperated by the deceit she had em- 
ployed to conceal it, till concealment was no 
longer necessary. He had been deceived in 
an affair wherein he meant to be the deceiver ; 
outwitted by the superior cunning of a woman 
whose understanding he despised, and to 
whom he had sacrificed his pride and his 
liberty, without saving himself from the ruin 
which had impended over his head. Madame 
Montoni had contrived to have the greatest 
part of what she really did possess, settled 
upon herself : what remained, though it was 
totally inadequate both to her husband's ex- 
pectations and to his necessities, he had con- 
verted into money, and brought with him to 
Venice, that he might a little longer delude 
society, and make a last effort to regain the 
fortunes he had lost. 

The hints which had been thrown out to 
Valancourt concerning Montoni's character 
and condition were too true ; but it was now 
left to time and occasion to unfold the circum- 
stances both of what had, and of what had 
not been hinted, — ^and to time and occasion we 
commit them. 

Madame Montoni was not of a nature to 
bear injuries with meekness, or to resent them 
with dignity : her exasperated pride displayed 
itself in all the violence and acrimony of a 
little, or at least of an ill-regulated mind. 
She would not acknowledge, even to herself, 
that she had in any degree provoked contempt 
by her duplicity ; but wealdy persisted in be- 
heving tiiat she alone was to be pitied,* and 
Montoni alone to be censured ; for, as her 
mind had naturally little perception of moral 
obligation, she seldom understood its force but 
when it happened to be violated against herself: 
her vanity had already been severely shocked 
\)Y sc ^l^QQvery of Montoni's contempt : it re- 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 93 

mained to be further proved by a discovery of had never befcyre occurred, and which excited 
his circumstances. His mansion at Venice, not only surprise, but some degree of alarm in 
though its furniture discovered a part of the Emily's mind, who had unwillingly discovered 
truth to unprejudiced persons, told nothing to much of his character when he had most endear 
those who were blinded by a resolution to be> voured to disguise it. After these visits, Mon- 
h'eve whatever they wished. Madame Montoni toni was often more thoughtful than usual; 
still thought herself little less than a princess, sometimes the deep workings di his mind en- 
possessing a palace at Venice, and a castle tirely abstracted him from surrounding objects, 
among the Apennines. To the castle di Udol- and threw a gloom over his visage that rendered 
pho, indeed, Montoni sometimes talked of going it terrible ; at others, his eyes seemed almost to 
for a few weeks, to examine into its condition, flash fire, and all the eneigies of his soul ap- 
and to receive some rents ; for it appeared that peared to be roused for some great enterprisei. 
he had not been there for two years, and that Emily observed these written characters of his 
during this period it had been inhabited only by thoughts with deep interest and not without 
an old servant, whom he called his steward. some degree of awe, when she considered that 

Emily listened to the mention of this journey she was entirely in his power ; but forbore even 
with pleasure ; for she not only expected from to hint her fears, or her observations, to Mar 
it new ideas, but a release from the persevering dame Montoni, who discerned nothing in her 
assiduities of Count Morano. In the country, husband, at these times, but his usual 
too, she would have leisure to think of Valan- sternness. 

court, and to indulge the melancholy which A second letter from M. Quesnel announced 
his image, and a recollection of the scenes of the arrival of himself and his lady at the villa 
La Valine, always blessed with the memory of Miarenti ; stated several circumstances of his 
her parents, awakened. The ideal scenes good fortune respecting the a£fair that had 
were dearer and more soothing to her heart, brought him into Italy ; and concluded with 
than all the splendour of gay assemblies ; an earnest request to see Montoni, his wife 
they were a kind of talisman tiiat expelled the and niece, at his new estate. 
poison of temporary evils, and supported her Emily received about the same period a 
hopes of happy days : they appeared like a much more interesting letter, and which 
beautiful landscape lighted up by a gleam of soothed for a while every anxiety of her heart, 
sunshine, and seen through a perspective of Valancourt, hoping she might be still at 
dark and rugged rocks. Venice, had trusted a letter to the ordinary 

But Count Morano did not long confine him- post, that told of his health, and of his un- 
self to silent assiduities; he declared his passion ceasing and anxious affection. He had lin- 
to Emily, and made proposals to Montoni, gered at Thoulouse for some time after her 
who encomaged, though Emily rejected him : departure, that he might indulge the melan- 
with Montoni for his friend, and an abundance choly pleasure of wandering through.the scenes 
of vanity to delude him, he did not despair. of where he had been accustomed to behold her, 
success. Emily was astonished and highly dis- and had thence gone to his brother's chateau, 
gfusted at his perseverance, after she had ex- which was in the neighbourhood of La 
plained her sentiments with a frankness that Valine. Having mentioned this, he added, 
would not allow him to misunderstand them. ' If the duty of attending my regiment dkl 

He now passed the greater part of his time not require my departure, I know not when 1 
at Montoni's, dining there almost daily, and should have resolution enough to quit the 
attending madame and Emily wherever they neighbourhood of a place which is endeared by 
went ; and all this notwithstanding the uni- the remembrance of you. The vicinity to La 
form reserve of Emiljr, whose aunt seemed Val^ has alone detained me thus long at Estu- 
as anxious as Montoni to promote this mar- viere : I frequently ride thither early in the 
riage, and would never dispense with her morning, that I may wander, at leisure through 
attendance at any assembly where the count the day, among scenes which were once your 
proposed to be present. home, where I have been accustomed to see 

Montoni now said nothing of his intended you, and hear you converse. I have renewed 
journey, of which Emily waited impatiently to my acquaintance with the good old Theresa, 
near ; and he was seldom at home but when who rejoiced to see me, that she might talk of 
the count or Signor Orsino was there, for you : I need not say how much this circum- 
between himself and Cavigni a coolness stance attached me to her, or how eagerly I lis- 
seemed to subsist, though the latter remained tened to her upon her favourite subject. You 
in his house. With Orsino, Montoni was fre- will guess the motive that first induced me to 
quently closeted for hours together ; and what- make myself known to Theresa : it was, in- 
ever might be the business upon which they deed, no other than that of gaining admit- 
consulted, it appeared to be of consequence, tance into the chateau and gardens which my 
since Montoni often sacrificed to it his favourite Emily had so lately inhabited ; here, then, I 
passion for play, and remained at home the wander, and meet your image under every 
whole night. There was somewhat of privacy, shade: but chiefly I love to sit beneath tlie 
too, in the manner of Orsino's visits, which spreading braftches of your. fa.vQ\u:v\j^ ^Vasi^x 



94 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



where once, Emily, we sat together ; where I 
first ventured to tell you that I loved. O 
Emily t the remembrance of those moments 
overcomes me — I sit lost in reverie — I en- 
deavour to see you dimly through my tears, in 



morning, and therefore I mention the circum- 
stance. — She shed tears while she r^ted that 
she was going to leave the service of her dear 
mistress, and the chateau where ^or bad 
lived so many happy yiears ; "apd all this," 



aP the heaven of peace and innocence, such as added she, ' ' without even a letter frcxtn Made- 



you then appeared to me ; to hear a^ain the 
iu:cents of that voice, which then thrilled my 
heart with tenderness and hope. I lean on 
the wall of the terrace, where we together 
watched the rapid current of the Garonne 
below, while I described the wild scenery 



moiselle to soften the news ; but it is all Mon- 
sieur Quesnel's doings, and I dare say she 
does not even know what is going forward." 

'Theresa added, that she had received a 
letter from him, informing her the chateau was 
let : and that as her service would no longo* 



about its source, but thought only of you. O be required, she must quit the place on that 
EmUy I are these moments passed for ever— day week, when the new tenant would arrive. 
V ill tney never more return ?' ' Theresa had been surprised by a visit from 

In another part of his letter he wrote thus : M. Quesnel, some time before the receipt of 
^ You see my letter is dated on many difierent this letter, who was accompanied by a 
days« and, if you look back to the first, you will stranger that viewed the premises with much 
perceive that I began to write soon after your curiosity.' 

departiu-e from France. To write was indeed Towards the conclusion of this letter, which 
the only employment that withdrew me from is dated a week after tiiis sentence, Valancourt 
my own melancholy, and rendered your adds, * I have received a summons from my 
absence supportable, or rather it seemed to regiment, and I join it without regret, since I 
destroy absence ; for, when I was conversing am shut out from the scenes that are so 
'9ASh you on paper, and telling you every interesting to my heart I rode to La Valine 
sentiment and affection of my heart, you this morning, and heard that the new 
almost appeared to be present. This employ- tenant was arrived, and that Theresa 
fiient has been from time to time my chief was gone. I should not treat the subject 
consolation, and I have deferred sending off thus familiariy if I did not believe you to be 
Wy packet, merely for the comfort of pro- uninformed of this disposal of your house ; 
longing it, though it was certain that what I for your satisfaction I have endeavoured to 
had written, was written to no purpose till you learn something of the diaracter and fortune 
received it Whenever my mind has been of your tenant, but without success. He is a 
more than usually depressed, I have come to gentleman, they say, and this is all I can hear, 
pour forth its sorrows to you, and have ^ways The place as I wandered round the boundaries 
found consolation ; and when any little occur- appeared more mdancholy to my imagination 
rfence has interested my heart, and given a than I had ever seen it I wished earnestly 
gleam of joy to my spirits, I have hastened to have got admittance, that I might have 
to communicate it to you, and have received talten another leave of your favourite plane- 
reflected satisfaction. Thus my letter is a tree, and thought of you once more beneath 
kind of picture of my life and of my thoughts its shade ; but I forbore to tempt the curiosity 
for the last month ; and thus, though it has of strangers ; th^» fishing-house in the 
been deeply interesting to me while I wrote woods, however, was still open to rae ; thither 
it, and I dare hope will, for the same reason, I went, and passed an hour, which I cannot 
be not indifferent to you, yet to other readers even look l«ck upon without emotion. O 
it would seem to abound only in frivolities. Emily ! surely we are not separated for ever— 
Thus it is always when we attempt to describe siu-ely we shall live for each other I ' 



the finer movements of the heart ; for they 
are too fine to be discerned, they can only be 
experienced, and are therefore passed over 
by the indifferent observer, while the interested 



This letter brought many tears to Emily's 
eyes ; tears of tenderness and satisfaction on 
learning that Valancourt was well, and that 
time and absence had in no degree effaced 



one feels that all description is imperfect and her image from his heart. There were pas- 



jis egotism — 



unnecessary, except as it may prove the 
sincerity of the writer, and soothe his own 
sufferings. You will pardon all tl 
for I am a lover. 

• I have just heard of a circumstance which 
entirehr destroys all my faiiy paradise of 
Weal delight, and which will reconcile me to 
the necessity of returning 
»or I must 



to my regiment 



b*»ir.x«^ ..u'j "° longer wander beneath the 
S^f£^?.^!'*'!^^fre I have been accustomed 



_•« nave reason 



sages in this letter which particularly affected 
her, such as those describing his visits to La 
Valine, and the sentiments oH delicate affec- 
tion that its scenes had awakened. It was a 
considerable time before her mind was suffi- 
ciently abstracted from Valancourt to feel the 
force of his intelligence concerning La. Vall^. 
That Mons. Quesnel should let it, without 
even consulting her on the measure, both sur- 
prised and shocked her ; particularly as it 



to bri- ~T^^-^^"^® ^^ ^*^^^ proved the absolute authority he thought him- 



*n<niriede?°frr!i^ ^?^^^® ^^^s is without your self entitled to exercise in her 
6 ' '^o™ What Theresa told me l\\\s \rvLe, he had proposed before s 



affiairs. It is 
she left France 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



95 



thftt the chateau should be let during her tended to. But I fear it is now too late to 

absence, and to the economical pni- deliberate upon this i^an, and I must regret 

dence of this she- had nothing to object ; that it is no longer in my power to reject it.' 

but the committing what had been her father's ' It is too late,' said Montoni ; ' but since it 

villa to the power and caprice of strangers, is so, I am pleased to observe that you submit 

and the depriving herself of a sure home, to reason and necessity without indulging usc- 

^ould any unhappy circumstances make her less complaint. I applaud this conduct exceed- 

look back to her home as an asylum, were ingly, the more, perhaps, since it discovers a 

considerations that made her, even then, strength of mind seldom observable in your 

strongly oppose the measure. Her father, sex. When you are older, you will look back 

too, in his last hour, had received from her a with gratitude to the friends who assisted in 

solemn promise never to dispose of La rescuing you from tlie romantic illusions of 

Valine ; and this she considered as in some sentiment, and will perceive that they are 

degree violated if she suffered the place to be only the snares of childhood, and shoiild be 

let. But it was now evident with how little vanquished the moment you escape from the 



respect M. Quesnel had regarded these objec- 
tions, aiid how insignificant he considered 
every obstacle to pecuniary advantage. It 
appeared also, that he had not even conde- 



nursery. I have not closed my letter, and 
you may add a few lines to inform your unde 
of 3rour ac(|uiescence. You will soon see him, 
for it is my mtention to take you, with Madame 



scended to inform Montoni of the step he had Montoni, in a few days, to Miarenti, and yoa 



can then talk over the affair.' 

Emily wrote on the opposite side of the 
paper as follows : — 

• It is now useless, sir, for me to remonstrate 
upon the circumstances of which Signer Mon- 
toni informs me that he has written. I could 
have wished, at least, that the affair had been 
concluded with less precipitation, that I might 

_, _ __ ^ have taught myself to sutxiue some prejudices, 

and believedst thou shouldst die m the family, as the signer calls them, which still linger in 
where thy best years had been spent. Poor my heart. As it is, I submit. In point <tf 
Theresa ! — ^now art thou turned out in thy old prudence, nothing certainly can be objected ; 
age to seek thy bread I ' but, though I submit, I have yet much to 

Emily wept bitterly as these thoughts passed say on some other points of the subject, when 
over her mind, and she determined to consider I shall have the honour of seeing you. In the 
what could be done for Theresa, and to talk mean time I entreat you to take care of The- 
very explicitly to M. Quesnel on the subject ; resa, for the sake of, 



taken, since no motive was evident for Mon- 
toni's concealing the circumstance from her, 
if it had been made known to him : this both 
displeased and surprised her ; but the chief 
subjects of her uneasiness were — the tem- 
porary disposal of La Valine, and the dis- 
mission of her father's old and faithful ser- 
?ant, — • Poor Theresa,' said Emily. ' thou 
faadst not saved much in thy servitude, for 
thou vast always tender towards the poor, 



'Sir, 
• Your affectionate niece, 
•Emily St. Aubert.' 

Montoni smiled satirically at what Emily 

had written, but did not object to it ; and she 

withdrew to her own apartment, where she sat 

was intended fca: the purpose of communicating down to begin a letter to Valancourt, in which 

to her a part of M. Quesnel's letter concerning she related the particulars of her journey, and 

the transactions of La Valine, and she obeyed her arrival at Venice, described some of the 

him inunediately. Montoni was alone. most striking scenes in the passage over the 

* I have just been writing to Mons. Quesnel,* Alps ; her emotions on her first view of Italy ; 

said he, when Emily appeared, ' in reply to the the manners and characters of the people 



but she much feared that his cold heart could 
feel only for itself. She determined also to 
inquire whether he had made any mention of 
her affairs in h^ letter to Montoni, who soon 
gave her the opportunity she sought, by 
desiring that she would attend him in his 
study. She had little doubt that the interview 



letter I received from him a few days ago, and 
I wished to talk to you upon a subject that 
occupied part of it' 

• I also wished to speak with you on this 
topic, sir,' said Emily. 

'It is a subject of some interest to you, 



around her, and some few circumstances of 
Montoni's conduct But she avoided evien 
naming Count Morano, much more the decla- 
ration he had made, since she well knew how 
tremblingly alive to fear is real love, how 
jealously watchful of every circumstance that 



undoubtedly,' rejoined Montoni, ' and I think, ma^ affect its interest ; and she scrupulously 

^ou must see it in the light that I do ; indeed avoided to give Valancourt even the sUghtest 

It will not bear any other. I trust you will reason for believing he had a rival, 

agree with me, that any objection founded on On the following day Coimt Morano dined 

sentiment, as they call it, ought to yield to again at Montoni's. He was in an uncommon 

circumstances of sohd advantage. ' flow of spirits, and Emily thonght there was 

'Granting this, sir,' rephed Emily modestly, somewhat of exultation in hn manner of 

* those of humanity ought surely to be at- addressing her, which she had never observed 



^ TME MVSTBklBS OF VDOLPMO. 

before. She endeavoured to repress this by Emily, • to ejtpress my g^ratitude, to thank 
more than her usual reserve, but the cold you for your goodness ; but I must also thank 
civility of her air now seemed rather to encou- Signor Montoni, who has allowed me this 
rage than depress him. He appeared watch- opportunity of doing so.' 
ful of an opportimity of speaking with her Emily regarded the count with a look (rf 
alone, and more than once solicited this ; but mingled astonishment and displeasure. 
Emily always replied, that she could hear ' Why,' continued he, ' should you wish to 
nothing from him which he would be unwilling^ diminish the delight of this moment by that 
to repeat before the whole company. air of cruel reserve ? Why seek to throw me 

In the evening Madame Montoni and her again into the perplexities of doubt, by teach- 
party went out upon the sea, and as the count ing your eyes to contradict the kindness of 
ted Emily to his zendaletto, he carried her your late declaration ? You cannot doubt the 
hand to his lips, and thanked her for the con- sincerity, the ardour of my passion ; it is 
descension she had shown him. Emily, in therefore unnecessary, charming Enuly \ surely 
extreme surprise and displeasure, hastily with- imnecessary, any longer to attempt a disguise 
drew her hand, and concluded that he had of your sentiments.' 

spoken ironically ; but on reaching the steps ' If I ever had disguised them, sir,* said 
of the terrace, and observing by the livery that Emily with recollected spirit, ' it would cer- 
it was the count's zendaletto which waited tainly be unnecessary any longer to do so, 
below, while the rest of the party, having I had hoped, sir, that you would have spared 
arranged themselves in the gondolas, were me any further necessity of alluding to them ; 
moving on, she determined not to permit a but since you do not grant this, hear me 
separate conversation, and wishing him a good declare, and for the last time, that your per- 
evening, returned to the portico. The count severance has deprived you even of the esteem 
followed to expostulate and entreat ; and which I was inclined to believe you merited.* 
Montoni, who then came out, rendered soh- ' Astonishing !' exclaimed Montoni : * this 
citation unnecessary, for without condescend- is beyond even my expectation, though I have 
ing to speak, he took her hand, and led her hitherto done justice to the caprice of the sex I 
to the zendaletto. Emily was not silent ; she But you will observe. Mademoiselle Emily, 
entreated Montopi, in a low voice, to consider that I am no lover, though Count Morano is, 
the impropriety of these circumstances, and and that I will not be made the amusement oi 
that he would spare her the mortification your capricious moments. Here is the offer 
of submitting to them ; he, however, was of an alliance which would do honour to any 
inflexible. family ; yours, you will recollect, is not noble ; 

'This caprice is intolerable,' said he, 'and you long resisted my remonstrances, but my 
shall not be indulged : here is no impropriety honour is now engaged, and it shall not be 
in the case.' trifled with. You shall adhere to the declar- 

At this moment Emily's dislike of Count ation which you have made me an agent to 
Morano rose to abhorrence. That he should convey to the count ' 

with undaunted assurance thus pursue her, ' I must certainly mistake you, sir,' said 
notwithstanding all she had expressed on the Emily ; * my answers on the subject have been 
subject of his addresses, and think, as it was uniform ; it is imworthy of you to accuse me 
evident he did, that her opinion of him, was of caprice. If you have condescended to be 
of no consequence so long as his pretensions my agent, it is an honour I did not solicit 
were sanctioned by Montoni, added indig- I myself have constantly assiu-ed Count 
nation to the disgust which she had felt Morano, and you also, sir, that I never can 
towards him. She was somewhat relieved accept the honour he oifers me, and I now 
by observing that Montoni was to be of the repeat the declaration.' 

party, who seated himself on one side of her. The count looked with an air of surprise and 
while Morano placed himself on the other, inquiry at Montoni, whose countenance also 
There was a pause of some moments as the was marked with surprise, but it was surprise 
gondolieri prepared their oars, and Emily mingled with indignation, 
trembled from the apprehension of the dis- ' Here is confidence, as well as caprice I* 
com-se that might foUow this silence. At said the latter. 'Will you deny your own 
length she collected courage to break it herself words, madam ?' 

in the hope of preventing fine speeches from ' Such a question is unworthy of an answer, 
Morano, and reproof from Montoni. To sir,' said Emily blushing ; 'you will recollect 
some trivial remark which she made the latter yourself, and be sorry that you have asked it ' 
immediately returned a short and disobliging ' Speak to the point,' rejoined Montoni in a 
reply ; but Morano immediately followed with voice of increasing vehemence. ' Will you 
a general observation, which he contrived to deny, your own words? will you deny that 
end with a particular compliment ; and though you acknowledged, only a few hours ago, 
Eniily passed it without even the notice of a that it was too late to recede from yoiir 
«aj/e, he was not discouraged. engagements, and that you accept the count's 

^Aave been impatient,' said he, addressing hand?' 



THE MYSTERIES^OF UDOLPHO. g^ 

' I will deny all this, for no words of mine the humility which you expect from a lover, I 

ever imported it.' warn you of the effect of ray displeasure !' 

•Astonishing! Will you deny what you ' M on toni, you are too precipitate,' said the 

wrote to Mons. Quesnel, your uncle? If you count, who had listened to this conversation 

do, your own hand will bear testimony against in extreme anxiety and impatience. • Signora, 

you. What have you now to say ?' continued I entreat your own explanation of this affair T 
Montoni, observing the silence and confusion ' Signor Montoni has said justly,'- replied 

of Emily. Emily, ' that all explanation may now be dis- 

' I now perceive, sir, that you are under a pensed with ; after what has passed I cannot 

very great error, and that I have been equally suffer myself .to give one. It is suffideot 

mistaken.' for me, -and for you, sir, that I repeat my 

' No more duplicity, I entreat ; be open late declaration ; let me hope this is the last 

and candid, if it be possible.' time it will be necessary for me to rqpeat 

' I have always been so, sir ; and can claim it — I never can accept the honour of your 

no merit in such conduct, for I have had alliance.' 
nothing to conceal.' • Charming Emily !' exclaimed the count in 

'How is this, signor ?' cried Morano with an impassioned tone, ' let not resentment make 

trembling emotion. you unjust ; let me not suffer for the offence 

'Suspend your judgment, Count,' replied of Montoni. — Revoke ' 

Montoni, ' the wiles of a female heart are ' Offence !' interrupted Montoni — ' Count* 

unsearchable. Now, madam, your explana- this language is ridiculous, this submission is 

tion.* childish : — Speak as becomes a man, not as 

• Excuse me, sir, if I withhold my explana- the slave of a petty tyrant.' " 

tion till you appear willing to give me vour con- 'You distract me, signor; suffer me to 

fidence ; assertion at present can only subject plead my own cause ; you have already proved 

me to insult.* insufficient to it.' 

' Your explanation, I entreat you !' said ' All conversation on this subject, sir,' said 

Morano. Emily, 'is worse than useless, since it cair 

'Well, well,' rejoined Montoni, 'I give bring only pain to each of us : if you would 

you my confidence ; let us hear this explana- oblige m^, pursue it no further.' 
tion.' ' It is impossible, madam, that I can thus 

' Let me lead to it, then, by asking a ques- easily resign the object of a passion which is 

tion.' the delight and torment of my life. — I must 

' As many as you please,' said Montoni con- still love — still pursue you with unremitting 

temptuously. ardour ; — when you shaU be convinced Of the 

• What, then, was the subject of your letter strength and constancy of my passion, your 
to Mons. Quesnel?' heart must soften into pity and repentance.' 

' The same that was the subject of your ' Is this generous, sir? is this manly? Can 

note to him, certainly. You did well to stipu- it either deserve or obtain the esteem you 

late for my confidence before you demanded solicit, thus to continue a persecution from 

that question.' which I have no present means of escaping?' 

• I must beg you to be more explicit, sir ; A gleam of moon-light that fell upon 
what was that subject ?' Morano's countenance revealed the strong 

' What could it be, but the noble offer of emotions of his soul ; and, glancing on 

Count Morano ?' said Montoni. Montoni, discovered the dark resentment 

' Then, sir, we entirely misunderstood each which contrasted his features, 
other,' replied Emily. 'By Heaven, this is too much V suddenly 

' We entirely misunderstood each other, exclaimed the count ; ' Signor Montoni, you 

too, I suppose,' rejoined Montoni, ' in the treat me ill ; it is from you that I shall look 

conversation which preceded the writing of for explanation.' 

that note? I must do you the justice to own ' From me, sir, you shall have it,' muttered ■ 

that you are very ingenious at this same art of Montoni ; ' if your discernment is indeed so far 

misunderstanding.' obscured by passion, as to make explanation 

Emily tried to restrain the tears that came necessary. And for you, madam, you should , 

to her eyes, and to answer with becoming learn, that a man of honour is not to he trifled 

firmness, ' Allow me, sir, to explain mysS with, though you may, perhaps, with impunity, j 

fully, or to be wholly silent.' treat a boy like a puppet.' 

' The explanation may now be dispensed This sarcasm roused the pride of Morano^ 

with; it is anticipated. If Count Morano still and the resentment which he had felt at the 

thinks one necessary, I will give him an indifference of Emily being lost in indignation 

honest one : you have changed your intention of the insolence of Montoni, he determined to 

since our last conversation ; and if he can mortify him by defending her. 
have patience and humility enough to wait till ' This also,' said he, replying to Montoni's 

to-morrow, he will probably find it changed last words, ' this also, shall not pass unnoticeA. 

again ; but as I have neither the patience nor I bid you lean\» svc, \Jaax ^qwl\»n^ 'a.^^x^'^51^ 



^ THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

enemy than ft woman to contend with : I will with intense anxiety all the unjust and tyran- 
protect Signora St. Aubert from your threat- nical conduct of Montoni, the dauntless 
ened resentment. You have misled me, and perseverance of Morano, and her own desolate 
would revenge your disappointed views upon situation, removed from her friends and 
the hmocent.' coimtry. She looked in vain to Valaneoort, 

' if isled you 1' i^torted Montoni with quick- confined by his profession to a distant kingdom, 
ness; *ii my conduct — my word — ' then as her protector ; but it gave her comfort to 
pausing, while he seemed endeavouring to know that there was at least one person m the 
restrain the resentment that flashed in his world who would sympathise in her afflictions, 
ms, fai the next moment he added, in a sub- and whose wishes would fly eagerly to release 
dued voice, 'Coimt Morano, this is a language, her. Yet she determined not to give him 
a sort of conduct, to which I am not accus- unavailing pain by relating the i^easons she 
tomed : it is the conduct of a passionate boy had to regret the having rejected bis better 
—as such, I pass it over in contempt' judgment concerning Montoni; reasons, 

•In contempt, Signor?' however, which could not induce her to 

* The respect I owe myself.' rejoined Mon- lament the delicacy and disinterested affection I 
too!, 'reqmres that I should converse more that had made her reject his proposal for a 
largely with you upon some points of the clandestine marriage. The approaching inter- 
subject in dispute. Return with me to Venice, view with her uncle she regarded with some 
ana I will condescend to convince you of your degree of hope, for she determined to represent 
error.' to him the distresses of her situation, and to 

' Condescend, sir ! but I will not condescend entreat that he would allow her to return to 
to be so conversed with.' France with him and Madame QuesneL 

Montoni smiled contemptuously ; and Emily, Then, suddenly remembering that her btiovnl 
now terrified for the consequences of what she La Vall^, her only home, was no longer at 
saw and heard, could no longer be silent. She her command, her tears flowed anew, and she 
explained the whole subject upon which she feared that she had little pity to expect from 
had mistaken Montoni in the morning, de- a man who, like M. Quesnel, could disjiose of 
daring that she understood him to have con- it without deigning to consult with her, and 
suited her solely concerning the disposal of could dismiss an aged and faithful servant, 
La Valine, and concluded with entreatnig that destitute of either support or asylum. But 
he would write immediately to M. Quesnel, though it was certain that she had herself no 
and rectify the mistake. longer a home in France, and few, very few 

But Montoni either was, or affected to be. friends there, she determined to return, if 
Still incredulous ; and Count Morano was still possible, that she might be released from the 
entangled in perplexity. While she was speak- power of Montoni, whose particularly oppres- 
ing, however, the attention of her auditors had sive conduct towards herself, and general 
b^n diverted from the immediate occasion of character as to others, were justly terrible to 
their resentment, and their passion conse- her imagination. She had no wish to reside 
quently became less. Montoni desired the with her unde, M. Quesnel, since his bebavionr 
count would order his servants to row back to to her late father, and to herself, had been 
Venice, that he might have some private uniformly such as to convince her, that in 
conversation with him ; and Morano, some- flying to him she could only obtain an ex- 
what soothed by his softened voice and change of oppressors ; neither had she the 
manner, and eager to examine into the full slightest intention of consenting to the proposal 
extent of his difficulties, complied. of Valancourt for an immediate marruufe, 

Emily, comforted by this prospect of release, though this would give her a lawful and a 
employed the present moments in endeavour- generous protector ; for the chief reasons 
ing, with condliating care, to prevent any which had formerly influenced hw conduct, 
fatal mischief between the persons who so still existed against it ; while others, whid 
lately had persecuted and insulted her. seemed to justify the step, would now be done 

Her spirits revived, when she heard once away ; and his interest, his fame, were at all 
more the voice of song and laughter resound- times too dear to her, to suffer her to consent 
ihg from the grand canal, and at length to a union which, at this early period of their 
entered again between its stately piazzas, lives, would probably defeat both. One sure 
The zindaleito stopped at Montoni's mansion, and proper asylum, however, would still be 
and the count hastily led her into the hall, open to her in France. She knew that she 
where Montoni took his arm, and said some- could board in the convent where she had 
thing in a low voice, on which Morano kissed formerly experienced so much kindness, and 
the hand he held, notwithstanding Emily's which had an affecting and solemn claim upon 
eftort to disengage it, and, wishing her a her heart, since it contained the remains of 
good evening, with an accent and look she her late father. Here she could remain in 
coiud not misunderstand, returned to his safety and tranquiUity till the term for whidi 
*^a/e//o with Montoni. La Valine might be let should expire ; or till 

-&nu/y; in her own apartment, considered \he artaxi^emftut of M. Motteville's afiain 



thm, mvstbries op udolpho. 



^ 



enabled her so far to estimate the remains of by vanity, ignorance, and crudty. I shaU 

be think it my highest glory to emulate such 
pride.' 

• I do not pretend to understand anything 
of these high-flown sentiments, niece : you 
have all that glory to yourself : I would teach 
you a little plain sense, and not have you so 



her fortune, as to judge whether it would 
prudent for her to reside there. 

Concerning Montoni's conduct with respect 
to his letters to M. Quesnel she had many 
doubts ; however he might be at first mistaken 
on the subject, she much suspected that he 

wilfully persevered in his error, as a means of wise as to despise happiness.' 
intimidating her into a compliance with his 'That would indeed not be wisdom, but 
wishes of uniting her to Count Morano. folly,' said Emily, ' for wisdom can boast no 
Whether this was or was not the fact, she higher attainment than happiness ; but you 
was extremely anxious to explain the affair to will allow. Madam, that our ideas of happi- 
M. Quesnel, and looked forward with a mix- ness may differ. I cannot doubt that yoa 



lure of impatience, 
approaching visit. 

On the following day Madame Montoni, 
being alone with Emily, introduced the men- 
tion of Count Morano, h^ expressing her 
surprise that she had not jomed the party on 
the water the preceding evening, and at her 
abrupt departure to Venice. Emily then 
related what had passed, expressed her con- 
cern for the mutual mistake that had occurred 
between Montoni and hersdf, and solicited 
her aunt's kind offices in urging him to give a 
decisive denial 'to the count's further ad- 
dresses : but she soon perceived that Madame 
Montoni had not been ignorant of the late 
conversation, when she introduced the pre- 
sent. 



hope, and fear, to her wish me to be happy, but I must fear you'are 

mistaken in the means of making me so.' 

'I cannot boast of a learnt education, 
niece, such as your father thought proper to 
give you, and therefore do not pretend to 
understand all these fine speeches about 
happiness ; I must be contented to understand 
only common sense ; and happy would it have 
been for you and your fatho* if that had been 
included in his education.' 

Emily was too much shocked by these re- 
flections on her father's memory, to despise 
this speech as it deserved. 

Madame Montoni was about to speak ; but 
Emily quitted the room, and retired to her 
own, where the little spirit she had lately 
exerted yielded to grief and vexation, and left 
• You have no encouragement to expect her only to her tears. From every review of 
from me,' said her aunt, ' in these notions. I her situation she could derive, indeed, only 
have already given my opinion on the subject, new sorrow. To the discovery that had just 
and think Signor Montoni right in enforcing, been forced upon her, of Montoni's unworthi- 
by any means, yoiu: consent. If young ness, she had now to add that of the cruel - 
persons will be blind to their interest, and vanity for the gratification of which her aunt 
obstinately oppose it, why, the greatest was about to sacrifice her ; of the effrontrey 
blessings they can have are friends who will and cunning with which, at the time that she 
oppose their folly. Pray what pretensions of meditated the sacrifice, she boasted of her 
any kind do you think you have to such a tenderness, or insulted her victim ; and of the 
match as is now offered you ?* venomous envy which, as it did not scruple to 

'Not any whatever, Madam,' replied Emily; attack her father's character, could scarcely 
• and therefore, at least, suffer me to be happy be expected to withhold from her own. 
in my humility.' During the few days that intervened be- 

' Nay, niece, it cannot be denied that you tween this conversation and the departure for 
have pride enough ; my poor brother, your Miarenti, Montoni did not once address him- 
father, had his share of .pride too ; though self to Emily. His looks sufficiently declared 
let me add, his fortune did not justify it.' his resentment : but that he should fbrbear to 

Emily, somewhat embarrassed by the indig- renew a mention of the subject of it, exceed- 
nation which this malevolent allusion to her ingly surprised her, who was no less astonished 
father excited, and by the difficulty of render- that, during three days. Count Morano neithejp 
ing her answer as temperate as it should be visited Montoni nor was named by hinir 
reprehensive, hesitated for some moments in Several conjectures arose in hw n^ind. Some- 
a confusion which highly gratified her aunt, times she feared that the dispute between 
At length she said, ' My father's pride, them had been revived, a5D4 \^ ende4 fetally 
Madam, had a noble object— the happiness to the count. Sometimes she" was inclined to 
which he knew could be derived onfy from hope that weariness, or disgust at hej: fibtl re- 
goodness, knowledge, and charity. As it jection of his suit, had induced him ^o relln- 
never consisted in his superiority, in point of quish it ; and at others, shj suspected thaX ha 
fortune, to some persons, it was not humbled had now recourse to stratc^em, and fcMrbora 
by his inferiority, in that respect, to others, his visits, and prevailed with Montoni to for- 
He never disdained those who were wretched bear the repetition of his name, in the ex- 
by poverty and misfortune ; he didsometimes pectation that gratitude and generosity would 
despise persons who, with many opportunities prevail with her to give him thftc«ta«o».''^'ssi!Sa. 
of happiness, rendered themselves miserable he could not ^vo^itQiCiVw^ 



lOQ THE MYSTERIES OP UtOLPtiO. 

Thus passed the time in vain conjecture E'en now wann tears to expectation swcl!, 

and alternate hopes and fears, till the day As Fancy o'er hU mind extends her power, 

arrived when Montoni was to set out for the A death-like stillness reign'd, where once the song/ 

villa of Miarenti, which, like the preceding The song of hercM», waked the midnight air, 

ones, neither brought the count, nor the men- Save* when a solemn murmur rolW ^ong, 

*-^~ 1* u;-. That seem d to say— For future worlds prepare, 

tion of nun. r- *• . • • e ^^ ^ 

Montoni having determined not to leave For time smipenous voice was frequent heard 

^y-«;«» ♦ni •^..,»^» ^..»«;»or ♦!,«♦ i,« *«;nrk* Shakmg the marble temple to its foil 

Venice tiU towards evenmg, that he might (By hamls he long had conquer'd ; vainly rear'di, 

avoid the heats, and catch the cold breezes of And distant ruins answer'd to his calL 

n^ht,«nbarked about an hour before sun- While Hamet slept, his camels round him lay. 

set, with his family, m a baige, for the Brenta. Beneath him, all his store of wealth was pUed ; 

Emily sat alone near the stem of the vessel. And here, his cruse and empty wallet lay, 

and, as it floated slowly on. watched the gay And there> the flute tluit cheer'd him in the wild, 

and lofty city lessening from her view, till its The robber Tartar on his slumber stole, 

palaces seemed to sink in the distant waves. For o'er the waste, at eve, he watch'd his train ; 

while its loftier towers and domes, illumined AhJ who his thirst of plunder shaU control? 

by the dedining sun, appeared on the horizon, Who calls on him for mercy-calls m vain I 

like those far-seen clouds which in more A poison'd poniard in his belt he bor^ 

northern climes often linger on the western ^^'5^^"'}'/^'''^ ^'^Pf^-^l^'u ^ "k**' 

.,^.^<. ««/4 ««*«v ♦»,*» i«e* ifnri^* ^f « c-.,«»,v.^^'<i ^**® deathful quiver at his back he borcj 

vei^ge. and catch the last hght of a sumnier s ^nd infants-at his very look had died ! 

evenmg. Soon after, even these grew dim, «,, ^ ^^^^. u u *v _. *v .••.«. « 

««^ t^A^^ ;« ^:c.«o«^» V..^»^ v,^,. t>\e,^^ . u„* ,.ul The moon s cold beam athwart the temple fell, 

and faded m distance from her sight ; but she And to his sleeping prey the Tartar iSf; ' 

still sat gazing on the vast scene of cloudless But, soft !-a startled camel shook his bdL 

sky and mighty waters, and Ustening in Then stretch'dhb limbs, and rear'd his drowsy head, 

pleasing awe to the deep-sounding waves, Hamet awoke ! the poniard glitter'd high I 

while, as her eyes glanced over the Adriatic, Swift from his couch he sprung, and 'scaped the blow; 

towards the opposite shores, which were, how- When from an unknown hand the arrows fly, 

ever, far beyond the reach of sight, she That lay the ruffian, in his vengeance, low. 

thought of Greece ; and a thousand classical He groan'd, he died ! from forth a column'd gate 

remembrances stealing to her mind, she ex- A fearful shepherd pale and silent crept, 

Who, as he watch d his folded flock star-late. 




and animation. The scenes of the Iliad And with the shepherd hasten'd to depart. 

iUapsed in glovnng colours to her fancy- And now Aurora breathes her freshening gale, 

scenes, once the haunt of heroes— now lonely. And faintly trembles on the eastern cloud ; 

and in rums ; but which still shone, in the And now the sun from under twilight's veil 

poet's. strain, in all their youthful splendour. Looks gaily forth, and melts her airy shroud. 

As her imagination painted with melancholy Wide o'er the level plains his slanting beams 

touches the deserted plains of Troy, such as Dart their long lines on Ilion's towered site ; 

they appeared in this alter-day, she reanimated The distant Hellespont with morning gleams, 

the landscape with the following little story : -^"^ °^^ Scamander winds his waves in light. 

<^TA V7 AQ All merry sound the camel bells so gay, 

. ^ ^ C>1AINZ,A5). And merry beats fond Hamet 's heart; for he. 

O'er Ilion's plains, where once the warrior bled. Ere the dan evening steals upon the day. 

And once the poet raised his deathless strain. His children, wife and happy home shall see. 

O'er Ilion's plains a weary driver led a t- -i t « « , 

His stately camels: For the ruin'd fane As Emily approached the shores of Italy 

Wide round the lonely scene his glance he threw ^^\ ^^^'^°, ^° discriminate the rich features 

For now the red cloud faded in the west, ^"^ ,^'7'^^ colouring of the landscape— the 

And twilight o'er the silent landscape drew purple hills, groves of orange, pine and cypress, 

Her deepening veil ; eastward his course he prest. shading magnificent villas, and towns rising 

There, on the gray horizon's glimmering bound, among vineyards and plantations. The noble 

Rose the proud columns of deserted Troy, Brenta, pouring its broad waves into the sea, 

And wandering shepherds now a shelter foimd now appeared ; and when she reached its 

Wxthm those walls where princes wont to joy. mouth, the barge stopped, that the horses 

Beneath a lofty porch the driver pass'd, might be fastened which were now to tow it up 

v^^°rLvJ!^*tL''^fu ^?*''^'^ *^^ ^^""^ ^^^^ ' *^® stream. This done, Emily gave a last 

^ifsiS^v^^^vTht^^lft cSf ' ^°^^ '^ ^' AdriaUc. and to the'diTsaU 

From distant lands with merchandise he came. ' W * * * *^*J from the sky-mix'd wave 

His all of wealth his patient servants bore ; Dawns on the sight ;' 

Oft deep-drawn sighs his anxious wish proclaim and the barge slowIy glided between the rreen 

Ao reach, again, his happy cottage door ; and luxuriant slopes of the river. The mn- 

Th^ftrJ^i ^"^{(^* ^ Wttle children dwell ; deur of the Palladian villas that adorn Oiese 

^/7«r«nj/csa/iaU pay the toil of many an hour; sYiotes nws considerably heightened by the 



THE MVSTERiaS OF UDOLPIIO, 



lOt 



setting rays, which threw strong contrasts of 
light and shade upon the porticos and long 
arcades, and beamed a mellow lustre upon the 
orangeries and the tall groves of pine and 
cypress that overhung the buildings. The 
scent of oranges, of flowering myrdes and 
other odoriferous plants, was diffused upon 
the air, and often from these embowered re- 
treats a strain of music stole on the calm, and 
softened into silence. 

The sun now sunk below the horizon, twi- 
light fell over the landscape, and Emily, 
wrapt in musing silence, continued to watch 
its features gradually vanishing into obscurity. 
She remembered her many nappy evenings, 
when with St. Aubert she had observed the 
shades of twilight steal over a scene as beau- 
ful as this, from the gardens of La Vallee ; 
and a tear fell to the memory of her father. 
Her spirits were softened into melancholy by 
the mfluence of the hour, by the low murmur 
of the wave passing under the vessel, and the 
stillness of the air, that trembled only at inter- 
vals with distant music : — why else should 
she, at these moments, have looked on her 
attachment to Valancourt with presages so 
very afflicting, since she had but lately 
receivcid letters from him that had soothed 
for a while all her anxieties ? It now seemed 
to her oppressed mind that she had taken 
leave of him for ever, and that the countries 
which separated them would never more be 
traced by her. She looked upon Count 
Morano with horror, as in some degree the 
cause of this ; but apart from him, a con- 
viction, if such that may be called which 
arises from no proof, and which She knew not 
how to account for, seized her mind — that she 
should never see Valancourt again. Though 
she knew that neither Morano's solicitations 
nor Montoni's commands had lawful power to 
enforce her obedience, she regarded both with 
a superstitious dread, that they wpuld finally 
prevail. 

Lost in this melancholy reverie, and shed- 
ding frequent tears, Emily was at length 
roused by Montoni ; and she followed him to 
the cabin, where refreshments were spread, 
and her aunt was seated alone. The counte- 
nance of Madame Montoni was inflamed with 
resentment that appeared to be the conse- 
quence of some conversation she had held 
with her husband, who regarded her with a 
kind of sullen disdain ; and both preserved 
for some time a haughty silence. Montoni 
then spoke to Emily of Mons. Quesnel : ' You 
will not, I hope, persist in disclairiiing your 
knowledge of the subject of my letter to 
4iim.' 

'I had hoped, sir, that it was no longer 
necessary for me to disclaim it,' said Emily ; 
'L had hoped, from your silence, that you 
were convinced of your error.' 

'You have hoped impossibilities thca,' 
replied Montoni ; ' I might as reasonably 



have expected to find sincerity and uniformity 
of conduct in one of your sex, as you to 
convict me of error in this affair. ' 

Emily blushed, and was silent ; she now 
perceived too clearly that she had hoped an 
impossibility : for where no mistake had been 
committed, no conviction could follow ; and 
it was evident that Montoni's conduct had 
not been the consequence of mistake, but of 
design. 

Anxious to escape from conversation which 
was both afflicting and humiliating to her, she 
soon returned to the deck, and resimied her 
station near the stem, without apprehension 
of cold, for no vapour rose from the water, 
and the air was dry and tranquil ; here, at 
least, the benevolence of nature allowed her 
the quiet which Montoni had denied her else- 
where. It was now past midnight. The 
stars shed a kind of twilight, that served to 
show the dark outline of the shores on either 
hand, and the gray surface of the river ; till 
the moon rose from behind a high palm-grove, 
and shed her mellow lustre over the scene. 
The vessel glided smoothly on ; amid the 
stillness of the hour Emily heard, now and 
then, the solitary voice of the bargemen on 
the bank, as they spoke to their horses ; 
while from a remote part of the vessel, with 
melanchqly song, 

* the sailor soothed, 

Beneath the trembling moon, the midnight wave.' 

Emily, meanwhile, anticipated her recep- 
tion by Mons. and Madame Quesnel ; con- 
sidered what she could say on the .subject of 
La Valine ; and then, to withhold her mind 
from more anxious topics, tried to amuse her- 
self by discriminating the faint-drawn features 
of the landscape reposing in the moon-light. 
While her fancy thus wandered, she saw at a 
distance a building peeping between the 
moon-light trees, and as the barge ap- 
proached, heard voices speaking, and soon 
distinguished the lofty portico of a villa over- 
shadowed by groves of pine and sycamore, 
which she recoUected to be the same that had 
formerly been pointed out to her as belonging 
to Madame Quesnel a relative. 

The barge stopped at a flight of marble 
steps, which led up the bank to a lawn. 
I^ights appeared between some pillars beyond 
the portico. Montoni sent forward his ser- 
vant, and then disembarked with his family. 
They found Mons. and Madame Quesnel with 
a few friends, seated on sofas in the portico, 
enjoying the cool breeze of the night, and eat- 
ing fruits and ices, while some of their 
servants at a little distance on the river's 
bank were performing a simple serenade,* 
Emily was now accustomed to the way of 
Uving in this warm country, and was not 
surprised to find Mons. and Madame Quesnel 
in their portico |wo hours after midnight. 

The usual salutations V«a5v%^N^x>'*<iE«' ^tfs«^- 



tod 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



pnny seated Uiemselves in the portico, and 
refreshments were brought them from the 
adjoining hall, where a banquet was spread, 
and the servants attended. When the bustle 
of this meeting had subsided, and Emily had 
recovered from the little flutter into which it 
had thrown her spirits, she was struck with 
the singular beauty of the hall, so perfectly 
accommodated to the luxuries of the season. 
It was of white marble, and the roof, rising 
into an open cupola, was supported by 
columns of the same materiaL Two opposite 
sides of the apartment, terminating in open 
porticos, admitted to the ball a full view 
of the gardens and of the river scenery; in 
the centre a fountain continually refreshed the 
air, and seemed to heighten the fragrance 
that breathed from the surrounding orangeries, 
while its dashing waters gave an agreeable 
and soothing sound. Etruscan lamps, sus- 
pended from the pillars, diffused a brilliant 
light over the interior part of the hall, leaving 
the remoter porticos to the softer lustre of the 
moon. 

Mons. Quesnel talked apart to Montoni of 
his own afiBurs in his usual strain of self- 
importance ; boasted df his new acquisitions, 
and then affected to pity some disappoint- 
ments which Montoni had lately sustained. 
Meanwhile the latter, whose pnde at least 
enabled him to despise such vanity as this, 
and whose discernment at once detected, 
under this assumed pity, the frivolous malignity 
of Quesnel's mind, listened to him in con- 
temptuous silence till he named his niece, and 
the'" they left the portico and walked away 
into the gardens. 

Emily, however, still attended to Madame 
Quesnel, who spoke of France (for even the 
name of her native country was dear to her), 
and she found some pleasure in looking at a 
person who had lately been in it. That 
country, too, was inhabited by Valancourt, 
and she listened to the mention of it with a 
faint hope that he also would be named. 
Madame Quesnel, who when she was in 
France had talked with rapture of Italy ; 
now, that she was in Italy, talked with equal 
praise of France, and enaeavoured to excite 
the wonder and the envy of her auditors by 
accounts of places which they had not been 
happy enough to see. In these descriptions 
she not only imposed upoH them, but upon 
herself ; for she never thoi^ht a present pleasure 
equal to one that was past : and thus the 
all fv!°^ climate, the fragrant orangeries, and 
«nn^t® *«xuries which surrounded her, slept 
dSam ^' ^^^ ^er fancy wandered over the 

EmLT*^^^ *^ a northern country. 
cow ^i^^%^^ ^ va»» for the name of Valan- 
of the ^^^. Montoni spoke in her turn 
she exnScS **^' Vemce, and of the pleasure 
MontoiT'on ,i'"*^? visiting the fine castie of 
^^ «WJ „ ^Pennine ; which latter men- 
^ ^'as merely a retaliating boast. 



for Emily wdi knew that her aunt had no 
taste for solitary grandeur, and particolariy 
for such as the castle of Udolpho promised. 
Thus the party continued to converse, and, as 
far as civihty would permit, to torture each 
other by mutual boasts, while they reclined on 
sofas in the portico, and were environed with 
delights both from nature and art, by which 
any honest minds would have been tempered 
to benevolence, and happy imaginations 
would have been soothed into enchantment. 

The dawn soon after trerolded in the 
eastern horizon, and the light tints of morn- 
ing gradually expanding showed the beauti- 
fully declining forms of the Italian mountains, 
and the gleaming landscapes stretched at 
their feet. Then the sun-b^ms, shooting up 
from behind the hills, spread over the scene 
that saffron tinge which seems to impart re- 
pose to all its touches. The landscape no 
longer gleamed ; all its glowing colours were 
revealed, except that its remoter features were 
still softened and imited in the midst of dis- 
tance, whose sweet effect was heightened to 
Emily by the dark verdure of the pines and 
cypresses that over-arched the foregromid of 
the river. 

The market people passing vnth Aeir boats 
to Venice now fonned a moving picture of 
the Brenta. Most of these had Uttle painted 
awnings, to shelter their owners frcmi the son- 
beams, which, together with the piles of 
fruits and flowers displayed beneath, and the 
tasteful simpUcity of the peasant girls who 
watched the rural treasures, rendered them 
gay and striking objects. The swift move- 
ment of the boats down the current, the quick 
glance of the oars in the water, and now and 
then the passing chorus oi peasants who re- 
chned under the sail of their little baric, cmt 
the tones of some rustic instrument played 
by a girl as she sat near her sylvan cargo, 
heightened the animation and festivity of the 
scene. 

When Montoni and M. Quesnel had joined 
the ladies, the party left the portico for the 
gardens, where the charming scenery soon 
withdrew Emily's thoughts from painful 
objects. The majesdc forms and rich verdure 
of cypresses she had never seen so perfect 
before : groves of cedar, lemon, and orange, 
the spiry clusters of the pine and poplar, the 
luxuriant chestnut and oriental plane, threw 
all their pomp of shade over these gardens ; 
while bowers of flowering myrtle and other 
spicy shrubs mingled their fragrance with that 
of flowers whose vivid and various colouring 
glowed with increased effect beneath the con- 
trasted umbrage of the groves. The air also 
was continually refreshed by rivulets, which, 
with more taSte than fa^ion, had been 
suffered to wander among the green recesses. 

Emily often lingered behind the party to 
contemplate the d»tant landscape, that closed 
a vista, or that gleamed beneath the dar1( 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



X03 



foliage of the fore-ground ; the spiral sum- 
mits of the mountains, touched with a purple 
tint, broken and steep above, but shelving 
graduallv to their base ; the open valley, 
marfced by no formed lines of art ; and the 
tall groves of cypress, pine, and poplar, 
sometimes embellished by a ruined villa, 
whose broken columns appeared between the 
branches of a pine that seemed to droop over 
theh- fall. 

From other parts of the gardens, the cha- 
racter of the view was entirely changed, and 
the fine solitary beautv of the landscape 
shifted for the crowded features and varied 
colouring of Inhabitation. 

The sun was now gaining fast upon the sky, 
and the party quitted the gardexis, and re- 
tired to repose. 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

'And poor Misfortufte feels the lash of Vice.* 

Thomson. 

Emilt seized the first opportunity of con- 
versing alone with Monsieur Quesnel concim- 
fng La V^lde. His answers to her inquiries 
were concise, and delivered with the air of a 
mdn who is conscious of possessing absolute 
power, and impatient of hearing it questioned. 
He declared that the dispos^ of the place 
^iras a necessary measiu-e ; and that she might 
consider herself indebted to his prudence for 
even the small income that remained for her. 
• But, however, 'added he, ' when this Venetian 
count (I have forgot his name) marries you, 
your present disagreeable state of dependence 
iVill cease. As a relation to you \ rejoice in 
the circumstance, which is so fortunate for 
you, and, I may add, so unexpected by your 
friends.' 

For some moments Emfly was chilled into 
silence by this speech ; and when she at- 
tempted to undeceive him concerning the pur- 
port of the note she had inclosed in Montoni's 
fetter, he appeared to have some private rea- 
son for disbelieving her assertion, and for ^ 
considerable time persevered in accusing her 
of capricious conduct Being at length, how- 
ever, convinced that she really disliked Morano, 
and had positively rejected his suit, his resent- 
ment wajs extrava^^ant, and he expressed it in 
terms equally pomted and inhuman ; for, 
secretly flatteredf by the prospect of a connec- 
tion with a nobleman whose title he had 
affected to forget, he was incapable of feeUng 
pity for whatever sufferings of his niece might 
stand in the way of his ambition. 

Emily saw at once in his manner all the 
difiiculties that awaited her ; and though no 
oppression could have power to make her 
renounce Valancoiu-t for Morano, her forti- 
tude now trembled at an encounter with the 
violent passions of her uncle. 

She opposed his turbulence and indignation 



only by the mild dignity of a superior mind : 
but the gentle firmness of her conduct served 
to exasperate still more his resentment, since 
it compelled him to feel his own inferiority ; 
and when he left her, he declared that, if sne 
persisted in her folly, both himself and Morano 
would abandon her to the contempt of the 
world. 

The calmness she had assumed in his pre- 
sence failed Emily when alone, and she wept 
bitterly, and called frequently upon the name 
of her departed father, whose advice to her 
from his deathbed she then remembered. 
* Alas !' said she, ' I do indeed perceive how 
much more valuable is the strength of forti- 
tude than the grace of sensibility, and I will 
also endeavour to fulfil the promise I then 
made ; I will not indulge in unavailing lamen- 
tation, but will try to endiu-e with firmness the 
oppression I cannot elude.' 

Somewhat soothed by the consciousness of 
performing a part of St. Aubert's last request, 
and of endeavouring to pursue the conduct 
which he would have approved, she overcame 
her tears, and, when the company met at 
dinner, had recovered her usual serenity of 
countenance. 

In the cool of the evening the ladies took 
^'t fresco along the bank of the Brenta la 
Madame Quesnel's carriage. The state of 
Emily's mind was in melancholy contrast with 
the gay groups assembled beneath the shades 
that ovemung this enchanting stream. Some 
were dancing under the trees, and others 
reclining on the grass taking ices and coffee, 
and cahnly enjoying the effect of a beautiful 
evening on a luxuriant landscape. Emily, * 
when she looked at the snow-capped Apen- 
nines ascending in the distance, thought of 
Montoni's casue, and suffered some terror 
lest he should carry her thither for the pur- 
pose of enforcing her obedience; but jttie 
thought vanished when she considered that 
she was as much in his power at Venice as she 
could be elsewhere. 

It was moonlight before the party returned 
to the villa, where supper was spread in the 
airy hall which had so much enchanted Emily's 
fancy on the preceding night The ladies 
seated themselves in the portico, tfll M. 
Quesnel, Montoni, and other gentlemen 
should join them at table ; and Emily en- 
deavoured to resign herself to the tran* 
quiUity of thehour. Presently, a barge stopped 
at the steps that led into the gardens, and 
soon after she distinguished the voices of 
Montoni and Quesnel, and then that of 
Morano, who in the next moment appeared. 
His compliments she received in silence, and 
her cold air seemed at first to discompose 
him ; but he soon recovered his usual gaiety 
of manner, though the officious kindness of 
M. and Madame Quesnel. Emily perceived, 
disgusted him. Such a degree oC ^x^sssisis^ 
She had «»xcaVj \i€^«es^ ^w^^^Xjr.^^^^^^ 



104 THE MYS TERIES OF UDOLPNO. 

M. Quesnel, for she had never before seen person who occasioned her to view it with 
him otherwise than in the presence of his less than perfect delight. They arrived 
inferiors or equals. there about midnight, when Emily was re- 

Whcn she could retire to her own apart- leased from the presence of the count, who 
ment, her mind almost involuntarily dwelt on with Montoni went to a casino, and she was 
the most probable means of prevailing with suffered to retire to her own apartment, 
the count to withdraw his suit ; and to her On the following day Montoni, in a short 
liberal mind none appeared more probable, conversation which he held with Emily, in- 
than that of acknowledging to him a prior formed her that he would no longer be triced 
attachment, and throwing herself upon his with, and that, since her marriage with the 
generosity for a release. When however, on count would be so highly advantageous to her 
the following day, he renewed his addresses, that folly only could object to it, and folly of 
sh« shrunk from the adoption of the plan she such extent as was incapable of conviction, it 
had formed. There was something so repug- should be celebrated without further delay, 
nant to her just pride, in laying open the and, if that was necessary, without her con- 
secret of her heart to such a man as Morano, sent. 

and in suing to him for compassion, that she Emily, who had hitherto tried remonstrance, 
impatiently rejected this design, and wondered had now recourse to supplication, for distress 
that she could have paused upon it for a prevented her from foreseeing that, with a 
moment. The rejection of his suit she re- man of Montoni's disposition, supplication 
peated in the most decisive terms she could would be equally useless. She afterwards 
select, mingling with it a severe censure of his inquired by what right he exerted this unli- 
conduct ; but though the count appeared mited authority over her, a question which 
mortified by this, he persevered in the most her better judgment would have withheld her 
ardent professions of admiration, till he was in a calmer moment from making, since it 
interrupted and released by the presence of could avail her nothing, and would afford 
Madame Quesnel. Montoni another opportunity of triumphing 

During her stay at this pleasant villa, Emily over her defenceless condition, 
was thus rendered miserable by the assiduities ' By what right !' cried Montoni with a 
of Morano, together with the cruelly exerted malicious smile ; ' by the right of my will ; 
authority of M. Quesnel and Montoni, who, if you can elude that I will not inquire by 
with her aunt, seemed now more resolutely what right you do so. I now reiAind you, for 
determined upon this marriage than they had the last time, that you are a stranger in a foreign 
even appeared to be at Venice. M. Quesnel, country, and that it is your interest to make 
finding that both argument and menace were me your friend ; you know the means : if you 
ineffectual in enforcing an immediate conclu- compel me to be your enemy — I will venture 
, sion to it, at length relinquished his endea to tell you that the punishment shall exceed 
vours, and trusted to the power of Montoni your expectation. You may know / am not 
and to the course of events at Venice. Emily, to be trifled with.' 

indeed, looked to Venice with hope, for there Emily continued, for some time after Mon- 
she would be relieved in some measure from toni had left her, in a state of despair, or 
the persecution of Morano, who would no rather stupefaction ; a consciousness of misery 
longer be an inhabitant of the same house was all that remained in her mind. In this 
with herself ; and from that of Montoni, situation Madame Montoni found her, at the 
whose engagements would not permit him to sound of whose voice Emily looked up ; and 
be continually at home. But amidst the her aunt, somewhat softened by the expres- 
pressure of her own misfortunes, she did not sion of despair that fixed her countenance, 
forget those of poor Theresa, for whom she spoke in a manner more kind than she had 
pleaded with courageous tenderness to Ques^ ever yet done. Emily's heart was touched ; 
nel, who promised, in slight and general terras, she shed tears, and after weeping for some 
that she should not be forgotten. time recovered sufficient composure to speak 

Montoni, in a long conversation with M. on the subject of her distress, and to cndea- 
Quesnel, arranged the plan to be pursued vour to interest Madame Montoni in her 
respecting Emily ; and M. Quesnel proposed behalf. But though the compassion of her 
to be at Venice, as soon as he should be in- aunt had been surprised, her ambition was not 
formed that the nuptials were concluded. to be overcome, and her present object was to 

It was new to Emily to part with any person be the aunt of a countess. Emily's efforts, 
with whom she was connected without feel- therefore, were as unsuccessful as they had 
ingsof regret.; the moment, however, in which been with Montoni ; and she withdrew to her 
shetookleaveofM. and Madame Quesnel was, apartment to think and weep alone. How 
perhaps, the only satisfactory one she had often did she remember the parting scene 
known in their presence. with Valancourt, and wish that the Italian 

Morano returned in Montoni's barge ; and had mentioned Montoni's character with less 

Emily, as she watched her gradual approach reserve ! When her mind, however, had 

A> tmt mope city, saw ^t her sid^ ^e only regovered from h?r first shock of this beha- 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 105 

viour, she considered that it would be impos- he then informed Emily that her marriage was 
sible for him to compel her alliance with to be celebrated on the following morning. 
Morano, if she persisted in refusing to repeat To her repeated assurances that it should not 
any part of the marriage ceremony ; and she take place, he replied by a malignant smile ; 
persevered in her resolution to await Montoni's and telling her that the count and a priest 
threatened vengeance, rather than give herself would be at his house early in the morning, he 
for life to a man whom she must have despised advised her no further to dare his resentment 
forhispresehtconduct had she never even loved by opposition to his will and to her own 
Valancourt ; yet she trembled at the revenge interest. ' I am now going out for the even- 
she thus resolved to brave, ing,' said he; 'remember that I shaH give 

An affair, however, soon after occurred, your hand to Count Morano in the morning.' 
which somewhat called oft Montoni's attention Emily having ever since his late threats 
from Emily. The mysterious visits of Orsino expected that her trials would at length arrive 
were renewed with more frequency since the to this crisis, was Ifess shocked by this deck- 
return of the former to Venice. There were ration than she otherwise would have been, 
others also besides Orsino admitted to these and she endeavoured to support herself by 
midnight councils, and among them Cavigni a belief that the marriage could not be valid 
and Verezzi. Montoni became more reserved so long as she refused before the priest to 
and austere in his manner than ever ; and repeat any part of the ceremony. Yet, as 
Emily, if her own interests had not made the moment of trial approached, her long- 
her regardless of his, might have perceived harassed spirits shrunk almost equally from 
that something extraordinary was working in the encounter of his vengeance and from the 
his mind. hand of Count Morano. She was not even 

One night, on which a council was not perfectly certain of the consequence of her 
held, Orsino came in great agitation of spirits, steady refusal at the altar, and she trembled 
and dispatched his confidential servant to more than ever at the power of Montoni, 
Montoni, who was at a casino, desiring that which seemed unlimited as his will ; for she 
he would return home immediately ; but saw that he would not scruple to transgress 
charging the servant not to mention his name, any law, if by so doing he could accomplish 
Montoni obeyed the summons and, on meet- his project. 

ing Orsino, was informed of the circumstances While her mind was thus suffering, she was 
that occasioned his visit and his visible alarm, informed that Morano asked permission to 
with some of which, however, he was already see her ; and the servant had scarcely departed 
acquainted. with an excuse, before she repented that she 

A Venetian nobleman who had on a late had sent one. In the next moment, reverting 
occasion provoked the hatred of Orsino, had to her former design, and determining to try 
been waylaid and poniarded by hired assassins ; whether expostulation and entreaty would not 
and as the murdered person was of the first succeed where a refusal and a just disdain 
connesdons, the Senate had taken up the had failed, she recalled the servant, and, 
affair. One of the assassins was now appre- sending a different message, prepared to go 
hended, who had confessed that Orsino was down to the count. 

his employer in the atrocious deed ; and the The dignity and assumed composure with 
latter, infonned of his danger, had now come which she met him, and the kind of pensive 
to Montoni to consult on the measures neces- resignation that softened her countenance, 
sary to favour his escape. He knew that at were circumstances not likely to induce him ' 
this time the officers of the police were upon to relinquish her, serving, as they did, to 
the watch for him all over the city ; to leave heighten a passion which had already intoxi- 
it at present, therefore, was impracticable ; and cated his judgment. He listened to all she said 
Montoni consented to secrete him for a few days with an appearance of complacency and of a 
till the vigilance of justice should relax, and wish to oblige her ; but his resolution re- 
then to assist him in quitting Venice. He mained invariably the same, and he endea- 
knew the danger he himself incurred by per- vourcd to win her admiration by every in- 
mitting Orsino to remain in his house ; but sinuating art he so well knew how to practise, 
such was the nature of his obligations to this Being at length assured that she had nothing 
man, Uiat he did not think it prudent to refuse to hope from his justice, she repeated in a 
him an asylum. solemn manner her absolute rejection of his 

Such was the person whom Montoni ad- suit, and quitted him with an assurance that 
mitted to his confidence, and for whom he felt her refusal would be effectually maintained 
as much friendship as was Qompatible with against every circumstance that could be 
his character. imagined for subduing it. A just pride had 

While Orsino remained concealed in his restrained her tears in his presence, but now 
house, Montoni was unwilling to attract public they flowed from the fulness of her heart, 
observation by the nuptials of Count Morano ; She often called upon the name of her late 
but this obstacle was in a few days overcome fatherandoften dwelt with unutterable aji^jiisJc*. 
by the departure of his criminal visitor ; and on the idea ol V^.\a.\iR.<i\ixX» 



xo8 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

solemnized with the secrecy which was neces- tains seemed to multiply as they went, and 

sary to the honour of Montoni. The little what was the summit of one eminence proved 

spirit which this reprieve had recalled now to be only the base of another. At length 

began to fail, and when Emily reached the they reached a little plain, where the drivers 

shore, her mind had sunk into all its former stopped to rest the mules, when a scene of 

depression. such extent and magnificence ox)ened below, 

Montoni did not embark on the Brenta, but as drew even from Madame Montoni a note 

pursued his way in carriages across the of admiration. Emily lost for a moment her 

country towards the Apennine ; during which sorrows in the immensity of nature. Beyond 

journey his manner to Emily was so particu- the amphitheatre of mountains that stretched 

larly severe, that this alone would have below, whose tops appeared as numerous 

confirmed her late conjecture, had any such almost as the waves of the sea, and whose feet 

cunfirmation been necessary. Her senses were concealed by the forests — extended the 

were now dead to the beautiful country cainpagna of Italy, where cities and rivers and 

through which she travelled. Sometimes she woods, and all the glow of cultivation, were 

was compelled to smile at the na'ivcii of mingled in gay confusion. The Adriatic 

Annette, in her remarks on what she saw, bounded the horizon, into which the Po and 

and sometimes to sigh, as a scene of peculiar the Brenta, after winding through the whole 

beauty recalled Valancourt to her thoughts, extent of the landscape, poured their fruitful 

who was indeed seldom absent from them, waves. Emily gazed long on the splendours 

and of whom she could never hope to hear in of the world she was quitting, of which the 

the solitude to which she was hastening. whole magnificence seemed thus given to her 

At length the travellers began to ascend sight only to increase her regret on leaving it : 
among the Apennines. The immense pine- for her, Valancourt alone was in that world ; 
forests which at that period overhung these to him alone her heart turned, and for him 
mountains, and between which the road alone fell her bitter tears, 
wound, excluded all view but of the cliffs From this sublime scene the travellers con- 
aspiring above, except that now and then an tinned to ascend among the pines, till they 
opening through the dark woods allowed the entered a narrow pass of the mountains, 
eye a momentary glimpse of the country which shut out every feature of the distant 
below. The gloom of these shades, their soli- country, and in its stead exhibited only tre- 
tary silence, except when the breeze swept mendous crags impending over the road, 
over their summits, the tremendous precipices where no vestige of humanity, or even of 
of the mountains that came partially to the vegetation, appeared, except here and there 
eye, each assisted to raise the solemnity of the trunk and scathed branches of an oak, 
Emily's feelings into awe : she saw only that hung nearly headlong irom the rock into 
images of gloomy grandeur, or of dreadful which its strong roots had fastened. This 
sublimity, around her ; other images, equally pass, which led into the heart of the Apen- 
gloomy, and equally terrible, gleamed on her nine, at length opened to day, and a scene of 
imagination. She was going she scarcely mountains stretched in long perspective, as 
knew whither, under the dominion of a person wild as any the travellers had yet pas.scd. 
from whose arbitrary disposition she had Still vast pine-forests hung upon their base, 
already suffered so much ; to marrj', perhaps, and cro>N'ned the ridgy precipice that rose 
a man who possessed neither her affection nor perpendicularly from tlie vale, while, above, 
esteem ; or to endure, beyond the hope of the rolling mists caught the sun-beams, and 
succour, whatever piuiishment revenge, and touched their cliffs with all the magical colour- 
tliat Italian revenge, might dictate.— The ing of light and shade. The scene seemed 
more she considered what might be the perpetually changing, and its features to 
motive of the journey, the more she became assume new forms, as the winding road 
convinced that it was for the purpose of con- brought them to the eye in difterent attitudes ; 
eluding her nuptials ^\^th Count Morano, while the shifting vapours, now partially con- 
with the secrecy which her resolute resistance cealing their minuter beauties, and now 
had made necessary to the honour, if not to illuminating them with splendid tints, assisted 
the safety, of Montoni. From the deep soli- the illusions of the sight, 
tudes into which she was emerging, and Though the deep valleys between these 
from the gloomy castle of which she had mountains were for the most part clothed 
heard some mysterious hints, her sick heart with pines, sometimes an abrupt opening pre- 
recoiled in despair, and she experienced sented a perspective of only barren rocks, with 
that, though her mind was already occupied a cataract flashing from their summit among 
by peculiar distress, it was still alive to the broken cliffs, till its waters, reaching the bot- 
influence of new and local circumstance ; why tom, foamed along with louder fury ; and 
else did she shudder at the image of this sometimes pastoral scenes exhibited their 
desolate castle ? 'green delights' in the narrow vales, smiling 
As the tmvGllcrs still ascended among the amid surrounding horror. There herds and 
pwe-forestR, steep rose over steep, the vaowu- ^ocV.s of ^oats and sheep browsing under the 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



zoo 



shade of hanging woods, and the shepherd's 
little cabin rear^ on the margin of a clear 
stream, presented a sweet picture of repose. 

Wild and romantic as were these scenes* 
their character had far less of the sublime than 
had those of the Alps which guard the en- 
trance of Italy. Emily was often elevated, 
but seldom felt those emotions of indescrib- 
able awe which she had so continually 
experienced in her passage over the Alps. 

Towards the close of diy the road wound 
Into a deep valley. Mountains, whose shaggy 
steeps appeared to be inaccessible, almost sur- 
rounded it. To the east a vista opened, and 
exhibited the Apennines in their darkest hor- 
rors ; and the long perspective of TCtiring 
summits rising over each other, their ridges 
clothed with pines, exhibited a stronger image 
of grandeur than any that Emily had yet seen. 
The sun had just sunk below the top of the 
mountains she was descending, whose long 
shadow stretched athwart the valley ; but his 
sloping rays, shooting through an opening of 
the cliffs, touched with a yellow gleam the 
summits of the forest that hung upon the 
opposite steeps, and streamed in full splen- 
dour upon the towers and battlements of a 
castle that spread its extensive ramparts 
along the brow of a precipice above. The 
splendour of these illumined objects was 
heightened by the contrasted shade which 
involved the valley below. 

'There,' said Montoni, speaking for the 
first time in several hours, * is Udolpho.' 

Emily gazed with inelancholy awe upon 
the castle, which she understood to be Mon- 
toni's ; for, though it was now lighted up by 
the setting sun, the gothic greatness of its fea- 
tures, and its mouldering walls of dark gray 
stone, rendered it a gloomy and subBme 
object. As she gazed, tiie light died away on 
its walls, leaving a melancholy purple tint, 
which spread deeper and deeper as the thin 
vapour crept up the mountain, while the bat- 
tlements above were still tipped with splen- 
dour From those, too, the rays soon faded, 
and the whole edifice was invested with the 
solemn duskiness of evening. Silent, lonely, 
and sublime, it seemed to stand the sovereign 
of the scene, and to frown defiance on all who 
dared to invade its solitary reign. As the 
twilight deepened, its features became more 
awful in obscurity ; and Emily continued to 
gaze, till its clustering towers were alone seen 
rising over the tops of the woods, beneath 
whose thick shade the carriages soon after 
began to ascend. 

The extent and darkness of these tall woods 
awakened terrific images in her mind, and 
she almost expected to see banditti start up 
from under the trees. At length the carriages 
emerged upon a heathy rock, and soon after 
reached the castle gates, where the deep tone 
of the portal bell, which was struck upon to 
give notice of their arrival, incr^sed the 



fearful emotions that had aSS^led EmUy. 
While they waited till the servant withm 
should come to open the gates, she anxiously 
siu^eyed the edifice : but the gloom that over- 
spread it allowed her to distinguish Uttlis more 
than a part of its outline, with the massy walls 
of the ramparts, and to know that it was vast, 
ancient, and dreary. From the parts she saw, 
she judged of the heavy strength and extent 
of the whole. The gateway bdfore her, lead- 
ing into the courts, was of gigantic size, and 
was defended by two roimd towers crowned 
by overhanging turrets embattled, where, iii>- 
stead of banners, now waved long grass and 
wild plants that had taken root among the 
mouldering stones, and which seemed to sigh, 
as the breeze rolled past, over the desolation 
around them. The towers were imited bv a 
curtain pierced and embattled also, below 
which appeared the pointed arch of a huge 
portcullis stumounting the gates : from these 
the walls of the ramparts extended to other 
towers overlooking the precipice, whose shatp 
tered outline, appearing on a gleam that 
lingered in the west, told of the ravages of 
war. — Beyond these all was lost in the ob- 
scurity of evening. 

While Emily gazed with awe upon the 
scene, footsteps were heard within the gates, 
and the undrawing of bolts ; after which an 
ancient servant of Uie castle appeared, forcing 
back the huge folds of the portal to admit his 
lord. As the carriage-wheels rolled heavily 
under the portcullis, Emily's heart sunk, and 
she seemed as if she was going into her 
prison ; the gloomy court into which she 
passed, served to confirm the idea ; and her 
imagination, ever awak^ocircumstance, sug- 
gested even more terrorsVlfl her reason could 
justify. 

Another gate delivered them into the second 
court, grass-grown and more wild than the 
first, where, as she surveyed through the 
twilight its desolation — its lofty walls over- 
topped with briony, moss, and nightshade, 
and the embattled towers that rose above — 
long suffering and murder came to her 
thoughts. One of those instantaneous and 
unaccountable convictions,- which sometimes 
conquer even strong minds, impressed her 
with its horror. The sentiment was not 
diminished when she entered an extensive 
gothic hall, obscured by the gloom of even- 
ing, which a light glimmering at a distance 
through a long perspective of arches only 
rendered more striking. As a servant brought 
the lamp nearer, partial gleams fell upon the 
pillars and the pointed arches, forming a 
strong contrast Nvith their shadows that 
stretched along the pavement and the walls. 

The sudden journey of Montoni had pre- 
vented his people from making any other pre- 
parations for his reception than could be had 
in the short interval since the arrival of the 
servant who had been sent forward <x<a!«cs 



2XO 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 



Venice : and this, in some measure, may ac- 
count for the air of extreme desolation that 
cnrenrwfaere appeared. 

The servant who came to light Montoni 
bowed in silence, and the muscles of his 
countenance relaxed with no symptom of joy. 
Montoni noticed the salutation by a slight 
motion of his hand, and passed on ; while his 
lady, following, and looking round with a 
degree of surprise and discontent which she 
teemed fearful of expressing, and Emily, sur- 
veying the extent and grandeur of the hall in 
timid wonder, approached a marble staircase. 
The arches here opened to a lofty vault, from 
the centre of which hung a tripod lamp which 
a servant was hastily lighting ; and the rich 
fret-work of the roof, a corridor leading into 
several upper apartments, and a painted 
window stretching nearly from the pavement 
to the ceiling of the hall, became gradually 
visible. 

Having crossed the foot of the stah-case 
and paued through an ante-room, they 
entered a spacious apartment, whose walls, 
wainscoted with black larch-wood, the growth 
of ^e neighbouring mountains, were scarcely 
distinguishable from darkness itself. 

' Bnng more light,' said Montoni as he 
entered. 

The servant, setting down his lamp, was 
withdrawing to obey him ; when Madame 
Montoni o^rving that the evening air of this 
mountainous region was cold, and that she 
should like a fire, Montoni ordered that wood 
might be brought. 

While he paced the room with thoughtful 
steps, and Madame Montoni sat silently on a 
couch at the upper end of it waiting till the 
scr\'ant returned, Emily was observing the 
singular solemnity and desolation of the 
apartment, viewed as it now was by the 
glimmer of the single lamp, placed near a 
liii^e Venetian mirror that duskily reflected the 
scene, with the tall figure of Montoni passing 
slowly along, his arms folded, and his coun- 
tenance shaded by the plume that waved in 
his hat. 

From the contemplation of this scene, 
Emily's mind proceeded to the apprehension 
of what she might suffer in it, till the remem- 
brance of A'alancou!^, far, far distant i came 
to her heart, and softened it into sorrow. A 
heavy sigh escaped her : but trying to conceal 
her tears, she walked away to one of the high 
windows that opened upon the ramparts, 
below which spread the woods she had passed 
in her approach to the castle. But the night 
shade sat deeply on the mountains beyond 
and their indented outline alone could be 
faintly traced on the horizon, where a red 
streak yet glimmered in the west The valley 
between was sunk in darkness. 

The scene within, upon which Emily turned 

on the opening of the door, was scarcely less 

fioomy. The old servant who had received 



them at the gates now entered, bendiii|imder 
a load of pine branches, while two of Mon- 
toni's Venetian servants followed with lights. 

' Your ExcelUnxa is welcome to the astle, 
said the old man, as he raised himsftlf firom 
the hearth, where he had laid the wood ; 'it 
has been a lonely place a long while ; bnt yoa 
will excuse it, signor, knowing we had but 
short notice. It is near two years, come next 
feast of St Mark, since your ExctiimMa was 
within these waUs.' 

' You have a good memory, old Ccrfo,' said 
Montoni ; ' it is thereabout ; sod how hast 
thou contrived to live so long Y 

* A-well-a-day, sir, with mncfa ado ; the 
cold winds that blow through the castle in 
winter are almost too much for me ; and I 
thought sometimes of asking your ExcelientM 
to let me leave the mountains, and go down 
into the lowlands. But I don't know how it 
is— I am loth to qtdt these old walls I have 
lived in so long.' 

' Well, how have yon gone on in the castle, 
since I left it ?* said Montoni. 

'Why. much as usual, signor; only it 
wants a good deal of repairing. There is the 
north tower — some of the battlements have 
tumbled down, and had liked one day to 
have knocked my poor wife (God rest her 
soul!) on the head. Yoiar Excellen*a most 
know * 

' Well, but the repairs,' interrupted Men* 
toni. 

'Ay, the repairs,' said Carlo: 'a part of 
the roof of the great hall has fallen in, and 
all the winds from the mountains rushed 
through it last winter, and whistled through 
the whole castle so, that there was no keeping 
one's self warm, be where one would. There 
my Mfifc and I used to sit shiveringf over a 
great fire in one comer of the little hall, ready 
to die with cold, and ' 

' But there are no more repairs wanted,' 
said Montoni impatiently. 

' O Lord I your Excei/gnga, yes — ^the wall of 
the rampart has tumbled down in three places ; 
then, the stairs that led to the west galleiy 
have been a long time so bad that it is danger- 
ous to go up them : and the passage laEiding 
to the great oak chamber, that overhangs tte 
north rampart — one night last winter I ven- 
tured to go there by myself, and yota Ex- 
cel /e^/sa ' 

•Well, well, enough of this,* said Mon- 
toni with quickness : ' I will taJk more with 
thee to-morrow.' 

The fire was now lighted ; Carlo svrept the 
hearth, placed chairs, wiped the dust from a 
large marble table that stood near it, and then 
left the room. 

Montoni and his family drew round the fire. 
Madame Montoni made several attempts at 
conversation, but his sullen answers repulsed 
her, while Emily sat endeavouring to acquire 
courage enough to speak to him. At length, 



TtiB MltSTBRlHti OP UDOLPHO. 



xxt 



in a tremulous voice, she said, ' May I ask, 
sir, the motive of this sudden journey ?' — After 
a long pause she recovered sufficient courage 
to repeat the question. 

• It does not suit me to answer inquiries,' 
said Montoni, ' nor does it become you to 
make them ; time may unfold them all ; but I 
desire I may be no further harassed, and I re- 
conmiend it to you to retire to your chamber, 
and to endeavour to adopt a more rational 
conduct than that of yielding to fancies, and 
to a sensibility which, to call it by the gentlest 
name, is only a weakness. ' 

Emily rose to withdraw. ' Good night, 
madam,' said she to her aunt with an as- 
sumed composure that could not disguise her 
emotion. 

• Good night, my dear,' said Madame Mon- 
toni in a tone of kindness which her niece had 
never before heard from her ; and the imex- 
pected endearment brought tears to Emily's 
eyes. She curtsied to Montoni, and was re- 
tiring. ' But you do not know the way to 
your chamber,' said her aunt. Montoni 
called the servant, who waited in the ante- 
room, and bade him send Madame Montoni's 
woman ; with whom, in a few minutes, Emily 
withdrew. 

• Do you -know which is my room?' said she 
to Annette, as they crossed the hall. 

• Yes, I believe I do, ma'amsclle ; but this 
is such a strange rambling place ! I have 
been lost in it already ; they call it the double 
chamber over the south rampart, and I went 
up this great staircase to it. My lady's room 
is at the other end of the castle.' 

E^nily ascended the marble staircase, and 
came to the corridor, as they passed through 
which Annette resumed her chat : — ' What a 
wild lonely place this is, ma'am 1 I shall be 
quite frightened to live in it. How often and 
often have I wished myself in France again ! 
I little thought, when I came with my lady to 
see the world, that I should ever be shut up 
in such a place as this, or I would never have 
left my own country I This way, ma'amselle, 
down this turning. I can almost beheve in 
giants again, and such like, for this is just 
like one of their castles ; and some night or 
other, I suppose, I shall see fairies too hop- 
ping about in that great old hall, that looks 
more like a church, with its huge pillars, than 
anything else.' 

' Yes,' said Emily smfling, and glad to es- 
cape from more serious thought, ' tf we come 
to the corridor about midnight and look down 
into the hall, we shall certainly see it illumi- 
nated with a thousand lamps, and the fairies 
tripping in gay circles to the sound of ddi- 
cious music ; for it is in such places as this, 
you know, that they come to hold their revels. 
But I am afraid, Annette, you will not be able 
to pay the necessary penance for such a 
sight : and if once they hear your voice, the 
whole scene wiU vanish in an instant' 



' O 1 if you will bear tne company, ma'am- 
selle, I will come to the corridor this verjr 
night, and I promise you I will hold my 
tongue ; it shall not be my feult if the show 
vanishes. — But do you think they will 
come ?' 

' I cannot promise that with certainty, but 
I will venture to say it will not be your fault if 
tlie enchantment should vanish.' 

' Well, ma'amselle, that is saying more 
than I expected of you : but I am not so 
much afraid of fairies as of ghosts ; and they 
say there are a plentiful many of them about 
the castle; now I should be frightened to 
death if I should chance to see any of them. 
But hush, ma'amselle, walk softiy ! I have 
thought several times something passed by 
me.' 

' Ridiculous 1' said Emily ; ' you must not 
indulge such fancies.' 

' O ma'am ; they are not fancies, for aught 
t know ; Benedetto says these dismal galLe* 
ries and halls are 6t for nothing but ghosts to 
Uve in ; and I verily believe, if I liv€ loo^ in 
them, I shall turn to one myself 1' 

' I hope,' said Emily, ' you will not suffer 
Signer Montoni to hear of these weak fears ; 
they would highly displease him.' 

' What, you know then, ma'amselle, all 
about it 1' rejoined Annette. • No, no, I do 
know better than to do so ; though, if th« 
signor can sleep sound, nobody else in the 
castle has any right to lie awake, I am sure.* 
Emily did not appear to notice this remaiic 

' Down this passage, ma'amselle \ this leads 
to a back staircase. 1 if I see anything, I 
shall be frightened out of ray wits I* 

' That will scarcely be possible,' said Emily 
smiUng, as she followed the winding of the 
passage which opened into another gallery; and 
then Annette perceiving that she had missed 
her way while she had been so eloquently 
haranguing on ghosts and fairies, wandered 
about through other passages and galleries* 
till at length, frightened by their intricacies 
and desolation, she called aloud for assistance : 
but they were beyond the hearing of the ser- 
vants, who were on the other side of the 
castle, and Emily now opened the door of a 
chamber on the left. 

^ O ! do not go in there, ma'amselle,* said 
Annette, ' you will only lose yourself further.* 

* Bring the hght forward,' said Emily, ' we 
may possibly find otu* way through these 
rooms.' 

Annette stood at the door in an attitude of 
hesitation, with the hght held up to show the 
chamber, but the feeble rays spread through 
not half of it. * Why do you hesitate?' feakf 
Emily ; * let me see whither this room leads.' " 

Annette advanced reluctantly. It opened 
into a suite of spacious and ancient apart- 
ments, some of which were hung with tapes- 
try, and others wainscoted with cedar and 
black larch-wood. What furm$.MSfc^JBS3»^«»s»^ 



tta 



THE MYSTERIES OP VDOLPHO, 



seemed to be almost as old as the rooms, and 
retained an appearance of grandeur, though 
covered with dust, and dropping to pieces 
with damp and with age. 

•How cold these rooms are, ma'amselle!' 
said Annette : ' nobody has lived in them for 
many, many years, they say. Do let us 
go.' 

' They may open upon the great staircase, 
perhaps,' said Emily, passing on till she came 
to a chamber hung with pictures, and took 
the light to examine that of a soldier on horse- 
back in a field of battle. — He was darting 
his spear upon a man who lay under the feet 
of the horse, and who held up one hand in a 
supplicating attitude. The soldier, whose 
botver was up. regarded him with a look of 
vengeance, and the coimtenance, with that ex- 
pression, struck Emily as resembling Montoni. 
She shuddered, and tiuned from it. Passing 
the light hastily over several other pictures, 
she came to one concealed by a veil of black 
silk. The singularity of the circumstance 
struck her, and she stopped before it, wishing 
to remove the veil, and examine what could 
thus carefully be concealed, but somewhat 
wanting courage. ' Holy Virgin 1 what can 
this mean?' exclaimed Annette, 'This is 
surely the picture they told me of at Venice. ' 
. * What picture?' said Emily. ' Why, a pic- 
ture — a picture,' replied Annette hesitatingly 
• — iMit I never could make out exactly what it 
was about either.' 

• Remove the veil, Annette.' 

• What ! I, ma'amselle ! — 1 1 not for the 
world !' Emily, turning round, saw Annette's 
countenance grow pale. 'And pray what 
have you heard of this picture to terrify you 
so, my good girl?' said she. 'Nothing, 
ma'amselle : I have heard nothing, only let us 
find oiu-way out.' 

' Certainly, but I wish first to examine the 
picture ; take the hght, Annette, while I lift 
the veil. Annette took the light, and im- 
mediately walked away with it, disregarding 
Emily's call to stay, who, not choosing to be 
left alone in the dark chamber, at length fol- 
lowed her. *What is the reason of this, 
Annette?' said Emily, when she overtook 
her ; ' what have you heard concerning that 
picture, which makes you so unwilling to stay 
when I bid you?' 

' I don't know what is the reason, ma'am- 
selle,' replied Annette, 'nor any thing about 
the picture ; only I have heard there is some- 
thing very dreadful belonging to it — and that 
it has been covered up in black ever since — 
and that nobody has looked at it for a great 
many years — and it somehow has to do with 
the owner of this castle before Signor 
Montoni came to the possession of it — 
and ' 

•Well, Annette,' said Emily, smiling, 'I 
perceive it is as you say — that you know 
aothJUig about t/ie picture.' 



• 

• No, nothing, indeed, ma'amselle, for thejr 
made me promise never to tell : ^but * 

' Well,' said Emily, who perceived that she 
was strugghng between her inclination to 
reveal a secret and her apprehension fwr the 
consequence, ' I will inquire no fiuther * 

' No, pray, ma'am, do not.' 

•Lest you should tell all,' interrupted 
Emily. 

Annette blushed, and Emily smiled, and 
they passed on to the extremity of this suite 
of apartments, and found themselves, after 
some further perplexity, once more at the top 
of the marble staircase, where Annette left 
Emily, while she went to call one of the 
servants of the castle to show them to the 
chamber for which they had been seeking. 

While she was absent, Emily's thoughts 
returned to the picture ; an unwillingness to 
tamper with the integrity of a servant had 
checked her inquiries on this subject, as well 
as concerning some alarming hints which 
Annette had dropped respecting Montoni : 
though her curiosity was entirely awakened, 
and ;5he had perceived that her questions 
might easily be answered. She was now, 
however, inclined to go back to the apartment 
and examine the picture ; but the loneliness of 
the hour and of the place, with the melan- 
choly silence that reigned around her, con- 
spired with a certain degree of awe, exdted by 
the mystery attending this picture, to prevent 
her. She determined, however, when day- 
light should have reanimated her spirits, to go 
thither and remove the veil. As she leaned 
from the corridor over the staircase, and her 
eyes wandered round, she again observed 
with wonder, the vast strength of the walls, 
now somewhat decayed, and the pillars of 
solid marble that rose from the hall and 
supported the roof. 

A servant now appeared with Annette, and 
conducted Emily to her chamber, which was 
in a remote part of the castle, and at the very 
end of the corridor from whence the suite of 
apartments opened through which they had 
been wandering. The lonely aspect of her 
room made Emily unwilling that Annette 
should leave her immediately, and the damp- 
ness of it chilled her with more than fear. 
She begged Caterina, the servant of the 
castle, to bring some wood and light a fire. 

• Ay, lady, it's many a year since a fire was 
lighted here,' said Caterina. 

•You need not tell us that, good woman,' 
said Annette ; ' every room in the castle feels 
like a well. I wonder how you contrive to 
hve here : for my part, I wish I was at Venice 
again.' Emily waved her hand for Caterina 
to fetch the wood. 

•I wonder, ma'am, why they call this the 
double chamber,' said Annette, while Emily 
surveyed it in silence, and saw that it was 
lofty and spacious like the others she had 
seen, and, like many of them, too, had its 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHOl 



"3 



^Hralls lined with dark larch-wood. The bed 
and other furniture was very ancient, and had 
an air of gloomy grandeur, like all she had 
seen in the castle. One of the high case- 
ments, which she opened, overlooked a 
xampart, but the view beyond was hid in 
darkness. 

In the presence of Annette, Emily tried to 
support her spirits, and to restrain the tears 
which every now and then came to her eyes. 
She wished much to inquire when Count 
Morano was expected at the castle ; but an 
unwillingness to ask unnecessary questions, 
and to mention family concerns to a servant, 
withheld her. Meanwhile, Annette's thoughts 
were engaged upon another subject : she 
dearly loved the marvellous, and had heard 
of a circumstance, connected with the castle, 
that highly gratified this taste. Having been 
enjoined not to mention it, her inclination to 
tell it was so strong that she was every in- 
stant on the point of speaking what she had 
heard ; such a strange circumstance, too, and 
to be obliged to conceal it, was a severe pun^ 
ishment ; but she knew that Montoni might 
impose one much severer, and she feared 
to incur it by offending him. 

Caterina now brought the wood, and its 
bright blaze dispelled for a while the gloom of 
her chamber. She told Annette that her lady 
had inquired for her ; and Emily was once 
again left to her own reflections. Her heart 
was not yet hardened against the stem man- 
ners of Montoni, and she was nearly as much 
shocked now, as she had been when she first 
witnessed them. The tenderness and affec- 
tion to which she had been accustomed till 
she lost her parents, had made her particularly 
sensible to any degree of unkindness, and 
such a reverse as this no apprehension had 
prepared her to support. 

To call off her attention from subjects that 
pressed heavily on her spirits, she rose and 
again examined her room and its furniture. 
As she walked around it she passed a door 
that was not quite shut ; and perceiving that 
it was not the one through which she entered, 
she brought the light forward to discover 
whither it led. She opened it, and, going 
forward, had nearly fallen down a steep narrow 
staircase that wound from it, between two 
stone walls. She wished to know to what it 
led, and was the more anxious since it com- 
municated so immediately with her apart- 
ment ; but in the present state of her spirits she 
wanted courage to venture into the darkness 
alone. Closing the door, therefore, she endea- 
voured to fasten it, but upon further examin- 
ation perceived that it had no bolts on the 
chamber side, though it had two on the other. 
By pLocing a heavy chair against it, she in. 
some measure remedied the defect : yet she 
was still alanned at the thought of sleeping in 
this remote room alone, with a door opening 
she knew not whither, and which could not be 



perfectly fiautened on the inside. Sometimes 
she wished to entreat of Madame Montoni 
that Annette might have leave to remain with 
her all night ; but was deferred by an appre- 
hension of betraying what would be thought 
childish fears and by an imwillingness to 
increase the apt terrors of Annette. 

Her gloomy reflections were soon after 
interrupted by a footstep in the corridor, and 
she was glad to see Annette enter with some 
supper sent by Madame Montoni. Having a 
table near the fire, she made the good girl 
sit down and sup with her ; and when their 
httle repast was over, Annette, encouraged by 
her kindness, and stirring the wood into a 
blaze, drew her chair upon the hearth, nearer 
to Emily, and said, — ' Did you ever hear, 
ma'amselle, of the strange accident that made 
the signor lord of this castle f 

• What wonderful story have you now to 
tell?' said Emily, concealing Uie curiosity 
occasioned by the mysterious hints she had 
formerly heard on that subject. 

' I have heard all about it, ma'amselle,' 
said Annette, looking round the chamber and 
drawing doscr to Emily ; ' Benedetto told me 
as we travelled together: says he, "Annette, 
you don't know about this castle here, that we 
are going to ?" " No, " says I, ' ' Mr. Benedetto, 
pray what do you know?" But, ma'amselle, 
you can keep a secret, or I would not tell you 
for the world ; for I promised never to tell, and 
they say that the signor does not like to have • 
it talked of.' 

' If you promised to keep this secret,' said 
Emily, ' you do right not to mention it.' 

Annette paused a moment, and then said, 
' O, but to you, ma'amselle, to you I may tell 
it safely, I know.' 

Emily smiled : ' I certainly shall keep it as 
faithfufas yourself, Annette.' 

Annette replied very gravely, that would do, 
and proceeded — 'This castle, you must know,, 
ma'amselle, is very old, and very strong, and 
has stood out many sieges as they say. Now 
it was not Signor Montoni s always, nor his 
father's ; no : but, by some law or other, it 
was to come to the signor if the lady died 
unmarried. ' 

• What lady?' said Emily. 

• I am not come to that yet,* replied An- 
nette : ' it is the lady I am going to tell you 
about, ma'amselle : but, as I was saying, this 
lady lived in the castle, and had everything 
very gaid about her, as you may suppose, 
ma'amselle. The signor used often to come 
to see her, and was in love with her, and 
offered to marry her: for, though he was 
somehow related, that did not signify. But 
she was in love with somebody else, and 
would not have him, which made him very 
angry, as they say ; and you know, ma'amselle, 
what an ill-looking gentleman he is when he 
is angry. Perhaps she saw him in a passion, 
and therefore would not have hvca.. ^\a\.^^5ks» 



Tt4 



THk MVSTERIES OP UDOLPMO. 



I was SAyingf, she wfta very melancholy and 
unhappy, and all that, for a long time, and — 
Holy Virgin ! wha^ noise is that ? did not you 
hear a sound, ma'amselle ?* 

' It was only the wind,' said Emily ; ' but do 
come to the end of your story.' 

' As I was saying — O, where was I ? — as I 
yk'as saying — she was very melancholy and 
unhappy a long while, and used to walk about 
upon the terrace, there, under the windows, 
l^ herself, artd cry so I it would have done 
your heart good to hear her. That is — I don't 
mean good, but it would have made you cry 
too, as they tell me.' 

' Well, but, Annette, do tell me the sub- 
stance of your tale.' 

' All in good time, ma'am : all this I heard 
before at Venice, but what is to come I 
never heard till to-day. This happened a 
great many years ago, when Signor Montoni 
was quite ayoimgman. The lady — they called 
her Signora Laurentini, was very handsome, 
but she used to be in great passions too, some- 
times, as weU as the signor. Finding he 
could not make her listen to him — ^what does 
he do, but leave the castle, and never comes 
near it for a long time ! but it was all one to 
her ; she was just as unhappy whether he was 
here or not, till one evening — Holy St. Peter I 
ma'amselle,' cried Annette, ' look at that lamp, 
see how blue it bums !' She looked fearfully 
round the chamber. ' Ridiculous girl !' said 
Emily, ' why will you indulge those fancies ? 
Pray let me hear the end of your story, I am 
weary.' 

Annette still kept her eyes on the lamp, and 
proceeded in a lower voice. 'It was one 
evening, they say, at the latter end of the 
year, it might be about the middle of Sep- 
tember, I suppose, or the beginning of 
October ; nay, for that matter, it might be 
November, for that, too, is the latter end of 
the year ; but that I cannot say for certain, 
because they did not tell me for certain them- 
selves. However, it was at the latter end of 
tlie year, this grand lady walked out of the 
castle into the woods below, as she had often 
done before, all alone, only her maid was with 
her. The wind blew cold, and strewed the 
leaves about, and whistled dismally among 
those great old chestnut-trees that we passed, 
ma'amselle, as we came to the castle — for 
Benedetto showed me the trees as he was 
talking — the wind blew cold, and her woman 
would have persuaded her to retirni : but all 
would not do, for she was fond of walking 
in the woods at evening time, and if the 
leaves were falling about her, so much the better. 

• Well, they saw her go down among the 
woods, but night came, and she did not 
return; ten o'clock, eleven o'clock, twelve 
o clock came, and no lady ! Well, the 
SCTvants thought, to be sure, some accident 
had be^len her, and they went out to seek 
««r- They searched aU night long, but 



could not find her, or any tfACe Of her : ftiid* 
from that day to this, ma'amselle, she has 
never been heard of.' 

' Is this true, Annette ?* said Emily in mucii 
siu'prise. 

' True, ma'am t' said Annette with a look 
of horror, ' yes, it is true, indeed. But thqr 
do say,' she added, lowering her voice, * they 
do say, that the signora has been seen several 
times since walking in the woods and abcnit 
the castle in the night ; several of the old 
servants, who remained here some time after, 
declare they saw her ; and since then, she has 
been seen by some of the vassals, irho have 
happened to be in the castie at night. Caiio 
the [old steward could tell such things, thejp 
say, if he would !" 

' How contradictory is this, Annette !' said 
Emily ; ' you say nothing has been since 
known of her, and yet she has been seen! ' 

• But all this was told me for a great secret/ 
rejoined Annette, without noticing the remark, 
' and I am sure, ma'am, you would not hurt 
either me or Benedetto, so much as to go and 
tell it again.' Emily remained silent, and 
Annette repeated her last sentence. 

' You have nothing to fear from my indis- 
cretion,' replied Emily ; ' and let me advise 
you, my good Annette, be discreet ^urseilf, 
and never mention what you have just told 
me to any other person. Signor Montoni, 
as you say, may be angry if he hears of it, 
but what inquiries were made concerning the 
lady?' 

' O ! a great deal, indeed, ma'amseSie, for 
the signor laid claim to the castle directly, as 
being the next heir ; and they said, that is, 
the judges, or the senators, or somebody of 
that sort, said, he could not take possession 
of it till so many years were gone by, and 
then, if after all the lady could not be found, 
why she would be as good as dead, and the 
castle would be his own ; and so it is his own. 
But the story went round, and many strange 
reports were spread, so very strange, ma'am- 
selle, that I shall not tell them.' 

'That is stranger still, Annette,' said 
Emily smiling, and rousing herself from hesr 
reverie. ' But when Signora Laurentini was 
afterwards seen in the castle, did nobody- 
speak to her ? ' 

• Speak— speak to her ! * cried Annette with 
a look of terror ; ' no, to be sure.' 

•And why not?' rejoined Emily, willing 
to hear fiu*ther. 
' Holy Mother I speak to a spirit ! ' 

• But what reason had they to conclude it 
was a spirit, imless they had approached and 
spoken to it ? ' 

'O ma'amselle, I cannot tell. How can 
you ask such shocking questions ? But no- 
body ever saw it come in or go out of the 
castle ; and it was in one place now, and 
then the next minute in quite another part of 
the castle ; and then it never spoke, and if 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO, 115 

It was aHve, what should it do in the castle if trajring her own weakness, she struggled to 

it never spoke ? Several parts of the castle overcome the illusions of fear, and dismissed 

have never been gone into since, they say for Annette for the night 

that very reason.' When she was alone, her thoughts recurred 

• What, because it never spoke,' said Emily, to the strange history of Signora Laurentini, 
trying to laugh away the fears that began to and then to her own strange situation, in the 
steaJ upon her. wild and solitary mountains of a foreign 

• No, ma'amselle, no,* replied Annette country, in the castle and the power of a 
rather angrily ; ' but because something has man to whom only a few preceding months 
be^n seen there. They say, too, there is an she was an entire stranger ; who had aheady 
old chapel adjoining the west side of the exercised an usurped authority over her, and 
castle, where any time at midnight you may whose character she now regarded with a 
hear such groans ! — it makes one shudder to degree of terror apparently justified by the 
think of them ; — and strange sights have fears of others. She knew that he had inven- 
been seen there ' tion equal to the conceptiQp^, and talents to 

• Pr'ythee, Annette, no more of these silly the execution, of any project* and she greatly 
tales,' said Emily feared he had a heart too void of feeling to 

' Silly tales, ma'amselle ! O, but I will tell oppose the perpetration of whatever his 

you one story about this, if you please, that interest might suggest. She had long ob- 

Caterinatoldme. It was one cold winter's night served the unhappiness of Madame Montoni, 

thatCaterina(sheoften came to the castle then, and had often been witness to the stem and 

she says, to keep old Carlo and his wife com- contemptuous behaviour she received from 

pai^y, and so he recommended her afterwards her husband. To these circumstances, which 

to tne signor, and she has lived here ever since) conspired to give her just cause for alarm, 

— Caterma was sitting with them in the httle were now added those thousand nameless 

hall: says Carlo, "I wish we had some of terrors which exist only in active imagina- 

thpse figs to roast, that lie in the store-closet, tions, and which set reason and examination 

but it is a long way off, and I am loth to fetch equally at defiance. 

them ; do, Caterina," says he, "for you are Emily remembered all that Valancourt had 

.young and nimble, do bring us some, the fire told her, on the eve of her departure from 

is in nice trim for roasting them ; they lie," Languedoc, respecting Montoni, and all that 

says he, '• in such a corner of the store-room, he had said to dissuade her from venturing on 

at the end of the north gallery ; here, take the journey. His fears had often since ap- 

the lamp," says he, " and mind, as you go up peared to her prophetic — now they seemed 

the great staircase, that the wind through the confirmed. Her heart, as it gave her back 

roof does not blow it out." So with that the image of Valancourt, mourned in vain 

Caterina took the lamp — Hush ! ma'amselle, regret ; but reason soon came with a consola- 

I surelv heard a noise.' tion, which, though feeble at first, acquired 

Emily, whom Armette had now infected vigour from reflection. She considered that, 

with her own terrors, listened attentively ; but whatever might be her sufferings, she had 

everything was still, and Annette proceeded : withheld from involving him in misfortime, 

" Caterina went to the north gallery, that is, and that whatever her future sorrows could 

the wide gallery we passed, ma'am, before we be, she was at least free from self-reproach, 
came to the corridor, here. As she went Her melancholy was assisted by the hollow 

with the lamp in her hand, thinking of no- sighings of the wind along the corridor and 

thing at all There, again !' cried Annette round the castle. The cheerful blaze of the 

suddenly — ' I heard it again ! — ^it was not fancy wood had long been extinguished, and she 

ma'amselle ! ' sat with her eyes fixed on the dying embers, 

' Hush I ' said Emily, trembling. They till a loud gust, that swept through the 
listened, and continuing to sit quite still, corridor, ana shook the dooKS and case- 
Emily heard a slow knocking against the ments, alarmed her ; for its violence had 
wall. It came repeatedly. Annette then moved the chair she had placed as a fastening, 
screamed loudly, and the chamber slowly and the door leading to the private staircase 
opened. — It was Caterina, come to tell stood half open. Her curiosity and her fears 
Annette that her lady wanted her. Emily, were agafn awakened. She took the lamp to 
though she now perceived who it was, could the top of the steps, and stood hesitating 
not immediately overcome her terror ; while whether to go down ; but again the profound 
Annette, half laughing, half crying, scolded stillness and the gloom of the place awedh«* ; 
Caterina heartily for thus alarming them ; and and determining to inquire further when day- 
was also terrified lest what she had told had light might assist the search, she closed the 
been overheard. — Emily, whose mind was door, and placed against it a stronger guard, 
deeply impressed by the chief circumstance of She now retired to her bed, leaving the 
Annette's relation, was unwilling to be left lamp burning on the table ; but its gloomy 
alone, in the present state of her spirits ; but light, instead of dispelling her fear, assisted 
to avoid offending Madame Montoni and be- it ; for, by its uncertaia ta.^^^, ^^ ^^^c^^ 



it6 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



fancied she saw shapes flit past her curtains, 
and glide into the remote obscurity of her 
chamber. — The castle clock struck one before 
she dosed her eyes to sleep. 



CHAPTER XX. 

' I think it is the weakness of mine eyes. 
That shapes this monstrous apparition. 
It comes upon me 1' 

Julius C^bsar. 

Daylight dispelled from Emily's mind the 
glooms of superstition, but not those of appre- 
hension. The Count Morano was the first 
image that occurred to her waking thoughts, 
and then came a train of anticipated evils 
which she could neither conquer nor avoid. 
She rose, and to relieve her mind from the 
busy ideas that tormented it, compelled her- 
self to notice external objects. From her case- 
ment she looked out upon the wild grandeur 
of the scene, closed nearly on all sides by 
alpine steeps, whose tops peeping over each 
. other faded from the eye in misty hues, 
while the promontories below were dark with 
woods that swept down to their base, and 
stretched along the narrow valleys. The rich 
pomp of these woods was particularly delight- 
ful to Emily ; and she viewed with astonish- 
ment the fortifications of the castle spreading 
along a vast extent of rock, and now partly 
in decay, the grandeur of the ramparts below, 
and the towers and battlements and various 
features of the fabric above. From these her 
sight wandered over the cliffs and woods into 
the valley, along which foamed a broad and 
rapid stream, seen falling among the crags of 
an opposite mountain, now flashing in the 
sunbeams, and now shadowed by over-arch- 
ing pines, till it was entirely concealed by 
their thick foliage. Again it burst from 
beneath this darkness in one broad sheet of 
foam, and fell thundering into the vale. 
Nearer, towards the west, opened the moun- 
tain vista whicli Emily had viewed with such 
sublime emotion on herapproach to the castle : 
a thin dusky vapour, that rose from the valley, 
overspread its features with a sweet obscurity. 
As this ascended and caught the sunbeams it 
kindled into a crimson tint, and touched with 
exquisite beauty the woods and cliffs over 
which it passed to the summit of the moun- 
tains ; then, as the veil drew up, it was delight- 
ful to watch the gleaming objects that progres- 
sively disclosed themselves in the valley— the 
green turf— dark woods — little rocky recesses 

^ h ri^^^^^"'^' ^"l^— t^e foaming stream 
r~^, , ?^ cattle, and various images of 
brilh!^ .be^-iuty. Then, the pine-forests 
m" unS' ^?,^ ^^^^ ^^^ broad breast of the 
round their ^^ ^^•^Z'Ci^ the mist settled 
^^^y RloZ ^n'^u"^^'' touching them witfi a 
''''' 4 he features Qf the vista now 



appeared distinctly, and the broad deep 
shadows that fell from the lower diflfs gave 
strong effect to the streaming splendour above ; 
while the mountains, gradually sinkuig in the 
perspective, appeared to shelve into the 
Adriatic Sea, for such Emily imagined to be 
the gleam of bluish light that termioated the 
view. 

Thus she endeavoured to amuse her fancy, 
and was not imsuccessful. The breezy ftesh- 
ncss of the morning, too, revived her. She 
raised her thoughts in prayer, which she felt 
almost most disposed to do when viewing the 
sublimity of nature, and her namd recovered 
its strength. 

When she tm-ned from the casement, her 
eyes glanced upon the door she had so care- 
fully guarded on the preceding night, and she 
now determined to examine whiSier it led ; 
but on advancing to remove the chairs, she 
perceived that they were already moved a 
little way. Her surprise cannot be easily 
imagined, when, in the next muiute, she per- 
ceived that the door was fastened. — She felt as 
if she had seen an apparition. The door of 
the corridor was locked as she had left it, but 
this door, which could be secured only on 
the outside, must have been bolted during 
the night She became seriously uneasy at 
the thought of sleeping agam in a chamber 
thus liable to intrusion, so remote too as it 
was from the family, and she determined to 
mention the circumstance to Madame Mon- 
toni, and to request a change. 

After some perplexity she found her way 
into the great hall, and to the room which 
she had left on the preceding night, where 
breakfast was spread, and her aunt was 
alone ; for Montoni had been walking over 
the environs of the castle, examining the 
condition of its fortifications, and talking for 
some time with Carlo. Emily observed that 
her aunt had been weeping, and her heart 
softened towards her with an affection that 
showed itself in her manner rather than in 
words, while she carefully avoided the appear- 
ance of having noticed that she was unhappy. 
She seized the opportunity of Montom's 
absence to mention the circumstance of the 
door, to request that she might be allowed 
another apartment, and to inquire again con- 
cerning the occasion of their sudden journey. 
On the first subject her aunt referred her to 
Montoni, positively refusing to interfere in 
the affair ; on the last she professed utter 
ignorance. 

Emily, then, with a wish of making her 
aunt more reconciled to her situation, praised 
the grandeur of the castle and the surrounding 
scenery, and endeavoured to soften every un- 
pleasing circumstance attending it. But 
though misfortune had somewhat conquered 
the asperity of Madame Montoni's temper, 
and, by increasing her cares for herself, had 
taught her to feel in SQtne degree for others, 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



"/ 



the capricious love of rule, which nature had 
planted and habit had nourished in her heart, 
was not subdfeed. She could not now deny 
herself the gratification of tyrannising over 
the innocent and helpless Emily, by attempt- 
ing to ridicule the taste she could not feel. 

Her satirical discourse was, however, inter- 
rupted by the entrance of Montoni, and her 
countenance immediately assumed a mingled 
expression, of fear and resentment, while he 
seated himself at the breakfast- table, as if 
unconscious of there being any parson but 
himself in the room. 

Emily, as she observed him in silence, saw 
that his countenance was darker and sterner 
than usual. ' O could I know,' said she to 
herself," what passes in that mind ; could I 
know the thoughts that are known there, I 
shoidd no longer be condemned to ^his tor- 
turing suspense !' Their breakfast passed in 
silence, till Emily ventured to request that 
another apartment might be allotted to her, 
and related the circumstance which made her 
vrish it. 

* I have no time to attend to these idle 
whims,' said Montoni ; ' that chamber was 
prepared for you, and you must rest contented 
with it It is not probable that any person 
would take the trouble of going to that remote 
staircase for the purpose of fastening a door. 
If it was not fastened when you entered the 
chamber, the wind, perhaps, shook the door 
and made the bolts slide. But I know not 
why I should undertake to account for so 
trifling an occurrence. ' 

This explanation was by no means satis- 
factory to Emily, Who had observed that the 
bolts were rusted, and consequently could not 
be thus easily moved ; but she forbore to say 
so, and repeated her request. 

' If you will not release yourself from the 
slavery of these fears,' said Montoni sternly, 
'at least forbear to torment others by the 
mention of them. Conquer such whims, and 
endeavour to strengthen your mind. No exis- 
tence is more contemptible than that which is 
embittered by fear.' As he said this, his eye 
glanced upon Madame Montoni, who coloured 
highly, but was still silent. Emily, wounded 
and disappointed, thought her fears were, in 
this instance, too reasonable to desei've ridi- 
cule ; but perceiving that, however they might 
oppress her, she must endure them, she tried 
to withdraw her attention from the subject. 
Carlo soon after entered with some fruit. 
' ' Your Excellenza is tired after your long 
ramble,' said he, as he set the fruit upon the 
table : ' but you have more to see after break- 
fast. There is a place in the vaulted passage 

leading to ' 

Montoni frowned upon him, and waved his 
hand for him to leave the room. Carlo 
stopped, looked down, and then added, as 
he advanced to tho bicakfast-lablc, and took 
\ip the. basket of fruit ; 



• I made bold, your Excellenza, to bring 
some cherries here, for my honoured lady and 
my young mistress. Will your ladyship taste 
them, madam?' said Carlo, presenting the 
basket ; ' they are very fine ones, though I 
gathered them myself, and from an old tree 
that catches all the south sun ; they are as b^ 
as plums, your ladyship.' 

• Very well, old Carlo,' said Madame Mon- 
toni ; • I am obhged to you. ' 

• And the young signora, too, she may like 
some of them ?' rejoined Carlo, turning with 
the basket to Emily ; ' it will do me good to 
see her eat some. ' 

•Thank you. Carlo,' said Emily» taking 
some cherries, and smiling kindly. 

' Come, come,' said Montoni impatiently, 
' enough of this. Leave the room, but be in 
waiting : I shall want you presently.' 

Carlo obeyed, and Montoni soon after.went 
out to examine further into the state of the 
castle ; while Emily remained with her aunt, 
patiently enduring her ill-humour, and endea- 
vouring, with much sweetness, to soothe her 
afifliction, instead of resenting its effect. 

When Madame Montoni retired to her 
dressing-room, Emily endeavoured to amuse 
herself by a view of the castle. Through a 
folding-door she passed from the great hall to 
the ramparts, which extended along the brow 
of the precipice round three sides of the 
edifice ; the fourth was guarded by the high 
walls of the courts, and by the gateway through 
which she had passed on the preceding even- 
ing. The grandeur of the broad ramparts, 
and the changing scenery they overlooked, 
excited her high admiration ; for the extent 
of the terraces allowed the features of the 
country to be seen in such various points of 
view that they appeared to form new land- 
scapes. She often paused to examine the 
gothic magnificence of Udolpho, its proud 
irregularity, its lofty towers and battlements, 
its high-arched casements, and its slender 
watch-tower, perched upon the corners of 
turretsl Then she would lean on the wall of 
the terrace, and, shuddering, measure with 
her eye the precipice below, till the dark sum- 
mits of the woods arrested it. Wherever she 
turned, appeared mountain-tops, forests of 
pine, and narrow glens opening among the 
Apennines, and retiring from the sight into in- 
accessible regions. 

While she thus leaned, Montoni, followed 
by two men, appeared ascending a winding 
path cut in the rock below. He stopped 
upon a cliff, and, pointing to the ramparts, 
turned to his followers, and talked with mXich 
eagerness of gesticulation. — Emily perceived 
that one of these men was Carlo, the other 
was in the dress of a peasant, and he alone 
seemed to be receiving the directions of Mon- 
toni. 

She withdrew from the walls, and pursued 
her walk, till s\v^Vv«a!c^ ^x ^ ^\^^\vK.^^^'y5>x^s«§^ 



xz8 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



I 



of carriagfe-wheels, and then the loud bell of 
the portal, when it instantly occurred to her 
that Count Morano was arrived. As she 
hastily passed the folding-doors from the 
terrace towards her own apartment, several 



see such a goodly sight in this Asmal old 
castle ! but here are masters and savants, 
too, enough to make the pSoe ring again. 
O I I was ready to leap throng th eros ty dd 
bars for joy I — O I who would ewer haw 



persons entered the hall by an opposite thought of seeing a Christian £aoe in this huge 
door. She saw them at the extremities of dreary house ! I could have kissed the very 
the arcades, and immediately retreated ; but horses that brought them.' 



the agitation of her spirits, and the extent 
and duskiness of the hall, had prevented her 
from distinguishing the persons of the 
strangers. Her fears, however, had but one 
object, and they called up that object to her 
fancy ; — she believed that she had seen Count 
Morano. 
When she thought that they had passed 



• Wdl, Annette, well, I am better noir.* 
' Yes, ma'amselle. I see you are. O I all 
the servants will lead merxr lives here, now; 
we shall have singing and dancing in the 
little hall, for the signor cannot hear ns 
there— and droll stories — Ludovico's come, 
ma'am ; yes, there is Lndovico come with 
them ! You remember Ladoyico» ma'am— « 



the hall, she ventured again to the door; and tall, handsome young man — Signor Cavigni's 
proceeded unobserved to her room, where lacquey — ^who always wears his doak with 
she remained agitated with apprehensions and such a grace, thrown round his left arm, and 



listening to every distant sound. At length, 
hearing voices on the rampart, she hastened 
to her window, and observed Montoni with 
Signor Cavigni walking below, conversing 
earnestly, and often stopping and turning to 



his hat set on so smartly, all on one side 
and—' 

' No,' said Emily, who was wearied by her 
loquacity. 

' What, ma'amselle, don't you remember 



the 
ap- 

the 



apprehended, brought a message from 
count In the next moment Annette 
peared. 

* Ah ! ma'amselle,' said she, ' here is 
Signor Ca\'igni arrived ! I am sure I rejoiced 
to see a Christian person in this place ; and 
then he is so good-natured too, he always 
takes so much notice of me ! — ^And here is 
also Signor Verezzi, and who do you think 
besides, ma'amselle?' 



njgbts 



at Venice? 



portico, on the moon-U^ht 
O ! I have listened to hmi I 

' I fear, to thy peril, my good Annette,' 
said Emily : ' for it seems his verses have 
stolen thy heart. But let me advise you ; if 
it is so, keep the secret ; never let him know 
it.' 



' Ah — ma'amselle ! — how can one keep such 
a secret as that ? ' 
' Well, Annette, I am now so much better 
• I cannot guess, Annette ; tell me quickly.' that you may leave me.' 

« Nflv. TTifl'flm r\cs m,*»cc ^«^» • . Q, but ma'amselle, I forgot to ask— how 

did you sleep in this dreary old chamber last 
night? — 'As well as usual. ' — * Did you hear no 
noises ? ' — • None. ' — ' Nor see anything ? '— 
; Nothing.'— • Well, that is surprising I'—' Not 
in the- least : and tell me why you sisk these 
questions. ' 

• O, ma'amselle ! I would not tell you for 
the worid, nor all I have heard about this 

would frighten you so.' 
you have frightened me 

dirf rxr^\ cov c,^ • """ ' * ""-""/.""" •"«/ therefore tell me what you 

did not say so. know without hurting your conscience. ' 

• No ' ma'am.2t'?^" ^' "^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^'^^' 'Jl K"^ * ^^^^ ^^ ^^« ^^ is haunted, 
xNo, ma amselle. and has been so these many years * 

• Lord^Wess m."".- ''-'^ a ' It is by a ghost, then, who can draw bolts.' 
verv ^"^hI^I ^ ' . ^^'"^ ^""^"°' 'you recover said Emily, endeavouring to laiiirh aw^her 
^^^^n^'^.K'J^^^'^'' '''^y' I thought you apprehensW; ' for I left that d#or o^n £^I 

night and found it fastened this mornine ' 
Annette turned pale, and said not a word. 
'Do you know whoiher any of the servants 

fastened tins door in the morning, before I 



Nay. ma'am, do guess once. 

'Well, then.' said Emily, with assumed 
composure, ' it is— Count Morano, I suppose. ' 

•Holy Virgin !' cried Annette. ' are you ill, 
ma'amselle ? you are going to faint I let me 
get some water. ' 

Emily sunk into a chair. 

•Stay. Annette,' said she feebly, 'do not 

leave me — I shall soon be better: open the ..„ , 

casement.— The count, you say— he is come, chamber, either Tit 
then ? I jf ^i^^j jg qjj 

'Who, I !— the count I No, ma'amselle, I already, and may'tl 



was dying just now. 

; But the count—you are sure, is not come ?' 
Why /wlU I"!!,®. ^"'•^ of that, ma'amselle. 
}i^ north tur?et " V' '^°"-^ ^^^ S'""'^ ^" 

''itQ eWfourtyaVanS \^^ "^'^'■"^^^^ ^?^'" 
vvun^ard, and 1 nev^r expecied Xo 



'^o,m^';«K.Ato I vMU be bound they did 



1 



i 



wards each other, at which time their discourse Ludovico — who rode the Cavaliero's gondola 

seemed to be uncommonly interesting. at the last regatta, and won the prize? And 

Of the several persons who had appeared who used to sing such sweet verses about 

in the hall, here was Cavigni alone : but Orlandos and about the Black-a-moors, too ; 

Emily's alarm was soon after heightened by the and Chariy— <;)harly — ^magne, yes, that was 

steps of some one in the corridor, who, she the name all under my lattice, in the west 



The MVSTERIElS OP udolPhO. 1x5 

not ; but t don't know : shall I go and ask, mystery over the object that excited a faint 
ma'amselle?' said Annette, moving hastily degree of terror. But a terror of this nature, 
towards the lynridor. as it occupies and expands the mind, and 

' Stay, Annette, I have other questions to elevates it to high expectation, is purely sub- 
ask ; tell me what you have heard concerning lime, and leads us, by a kind of fascination, 
this room, and whither that staircase leads.' to seek even the object from which we appear 

' I will go and ask it all directly, ma'am ; to shrink, 
besides, I am sure my lady wants me. I can> Emily passed on with faltering steps ; ui4 
not stay now, indeed, ma'am.' having paused a moment at the door before 

She hurried from the room without waiting she attempted to open it, she then hastily 
Emily's reply, whose heart lightlied by the entered the chamber, and went towards thi 
certaintythatMorano was not arrived allowed picture, which appeared to be enclosed in a 
her to smile at the superstitious terrcM* whidi frame of im^common size, that hung in a dark 
had seized on Annette ; for though she some- part of the room. She paused again, and 
times felt its influence herself, she could smile then with a timid hand lifted the veil ; but 
at it when apparent in other persons. instantly let it fall — perceiving that yrhaX iX 

Montoni having refused Emily another had concealed was no picture, and befoul 
chamber, she determined to bear with patience she could leave the cbamb^ she dropped 
the evil she could not remove, and in order to senseless on the floor. 

make the room as comfortable as possible, When she recovered her recollection, Om 
tmpacked her books, her sweet delight in r^nembrance of what she had seen Imd 
happier days, and her soothing resource in nearly deprived her of it a second time. She 
the hours of mod^ute sorrow : but there were had scarcely strength to remove from the 
hours when even these failed of their effect ; room, and regain her own ; and, when arrived 
when the genius, the taste, the enthusiasm of there, wanted courage to remain alone. Horror 
the sublimest writers were felt no longer. occupied her mind, and excluded for a time 

Her little hbrary being arranged on a high all sense of past and dread of future misfor- 
ciiest, part of the furniture of the ro<xn, she tune : she seated herself near the casement 
took out h^ drawing utensils, and was tran- because from thence she heard voices, though 
quil enough to be pleased with the thought of distant, on the terrace, and might see people 
sketching the sublime scenes beheld from her pass ; and these, trifling as they were, were 
windows ; but she suddenly checked this reviving circumstances. When her spirits had 
{Measure, remembering how often she had recovered their tone, she considered whether 
soothed herself by the intention of obtaining she should mention what she had seen to 
amusement of this kind, and had been pre- Madame Montoni ; and various and impor- 
yented by some new circumstance of mi^or- tant motives urged her to do so, among which 
tune. the least was the hope of the relief which an 

' How can I suffer myself to be deluded by overburdened mind finds in speaking cdf the 
hope,' said she, 'and, because Count Morano subjects of its interest. But she was aware 
is not yet arrived, feel a momentary happi- of the terrible consequences which such 
ness ? Alas 1 what is it to me, whether he is a communication might lead to ; and, dread- 
here to-day or to-morrow, if he comes at all ? ing the indiscretion of her aunt, at length en^ 
— and that he will come — ^it were weakness to deavoured to arm herself with resolution to 
doubt.' observe a profound silence on the subject 

To withdraw her thoughts, however, from Montoni and Vererzi soon after passed under 
the subject of her misfortunes, she attempted the casement, speaking dieerfully, and their 
to read ; but her attention wandered from the voices revived her. Presently the Signers 
page, and at length she threw aside the book, Bertolini and Cavigni joined the party on the 
and determined to explore the adjoining ten-ace ; and Emily, supposing that Madame 
chambers of the castle. Her imagination was Montoni was then alone, went to seek her ; 
pleased with the view of ancient grandeur, for the solitude of her chamber, and its 
and an emotion of melancholy awe awakened proximity to that where she had received so 
all its powers, as she walked through rooms severe a shock, again affected her spirit. 
obscure and desolate, where no footsteps had She foimd her aunt in her dressing-room, 
passed probably for many years, and remem- preparing for dinner. Emily's pale and 
bered the strange history of the former pos- affrighted coutenance alarmed even Madame 
sessor of the edifice. This brought to her Montoni ; but she had sufficient strength of 
recollection the veiled picture which had mind to be silent on the subject that still made 
attracted her curiosity on the preceding night, her shudder, and which was ready to burst 
and she resolved to examine it. As she passed from her lips. In her atmt's apartment she 
through the chambers that led to this, she remained till they both descended to dinner, 
found herself somewhat agitated ; its con- There she met the g^itlemen latety arrived, 
nexion with the late lady of the castle, and who had a kind of busy seriousness in their 
the conversation of Annette, together with looks, which was somewhat unusual with 
the circumstance of the veil, throwing a them, while their th.o>aj^Vi\^ ^RKsafe^NsjRk'o^s^ 



id6 THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 

occupied by some deep interest to suffer them that the indiscretion of her aunt might prove 
to bestow much attention cither on Emily or fatal to them both, she compelled herself to 
Madame Montoni. They spoke little, and endure a present and an inferioe evil, rather 
Montoni less. Emily, as she now looked on than to tempt a future and a heavier one. A 
him, shuddered. The horror of the chamber strange kind of presentiment frequently on 
rushed on her mind. Several times the colour this day occurred to her ; it seemed as if her 
faded from her cheeks ; and she feared that fate rested here, and was by some invisible 
illness woidd betray her emotions, and compel means connected with this castle, 
her to leave the room ; but the strength of ' Let me not accelerate it,' said she to her- 
her resolution remedied the weakness of her self ; ' for whatever I may be reserved. let me, 
flname ; she obliged herself to converse, and at least, avoid self-reproach.' 
even tried to look cheerful. As she looked on the massy walls of the 

Montoni evidently laboured under some edifice, her melancholy spirits represented it to 
vexation, such as would probably have be her prison ; and she started as at a new 
agitated a weaker mind or a more susceptible suggestion, when she considered how far 
heart, but which appeared, from the sternness distant she was from her native country, from 
of his countenance, only to bend up his facul- her little peaceful home, and from her only 
ties to energy and fortitude. friend — how remote was her hope of hap- 

It was a comfortless and silent meal. The piness, how feeble the expectation of again 
gloom of the castle seemed to have spread its seeing him ! Yet the idea of Valancourt, and 
contagion even over the gay countenance of her confidence in his faithful love, had hitherto 
Cavigni, and with this gloom was mingled a been her only solace, and she struggled bard 
fierceness such as she had seldom seen him to retain them. A few tears of agony started 
indicate. Count Morano was not named, to her eyes, which she turned aside to con- 
and what conversation there was, turned ceal. 

chiefly upon the wars which at that time Whi]j3 she afterwards leaned on the wall of 
agitated Uie Italian states, the strength of the the ramparts, some peasants at a litdc distance 
Venetian armies, and the characters of their were seen examining a breach, before which 
generals. lay a heap of stones, as if to repair it, and a 

After dinner, when the servants had with- rusty old cannon that appeared to have fallen 
drawn, Emily learned that the cavalier who from its station above. Madame Montoni 
had drawn upon himself the vengeance of stopped to speak to the men, and inquired 
Orsino had since died of his wounds, and that what they were going to do. ' To repsur the 
strict search was still making for his murderer, fortifications, your ladyship,' said one of 
The intelligence seemed to disturb Montoni, them ; a labour which she was somewhat sur- 
who mused, and then inquired where Orsino prised that Montoni should think necessary, 
had concealed himself. His guests, who all, particularlyas he had never spoken of the castle 
except Cavigni, were ignorant that Montoni as of a place at which he meant to reside for 
had himself assisted him to escape from any considerable time ; but she passed on to- 
Venice, replied, that he had fled in the night wards a lofty arch that led from the south to 
with such precipitation and secrecy, that his the east rampart, and which adjoined the 
most intimate companions knew not whither, castle on one side, while on the other it sup- 
Montoni blamed himself for having asked the ported a small watch-tower that entirely com- 
question, for a second thought convinced him mandcd the deep valley below. As she ap- 
that a man of Orsino's suspicious temper was proached this arch, she saw beyond it, winding 
not likely to trust any of the persons present along the woody descent of a distant moun- 
with the knowledge of his asylum. He con- tain, a loug troop of horse and foot, whom 
sidered himself, however, as entitled to his she knew to be soldiers only by the glitter of 
utmost confidence, and did not doubt that he their pikes and olhcr arms, for the distance 
should soon hear of him. did not allow her to discover the colour of 

Emily retired with Madame Montoni, soon their liveries. As she gazed the vanguard 
after the cloth was withdrawn, and left the issued from the woods into the valley ; but 
cavaliers to their secret councils ; but not the train still continued to pour over the 
before the significant frowns of Montoni had remote summit of the mountain, in endless 
warned his wife to depart, who passed from succession ; while, in the front, the military 
the hall to the ramparts, and walked for some uniform became distinguishable, and the corn- 
time in silence, which Emily did not interrupt, mandcrs, riding first, and seeming by their 
for her mind was also occupied by interests of gestures to direct the march of those that 
its own. It required all her resolution to for- followed, at length approached very near to 
bear communicating to Madame Montoni the the castle. 

terrible subject which still thrilled her every Such a spectacle, in these solitary regions, 

horror : and sometimes she was on the point both surprised and alarmed Madame Montoni, 

of doing so, merely to obtain the relief of a and she hastened towards some peasants who 

moment ; but she knew how wholly she was vjwe employed in raising bastions before the 

/fl the power of Montoni, and, considering so\3L\Vii^v\\\i:v\\.,\<>wtt^\Jcvvi\oO«.N<'a.% less abrupt 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 121 

than elsewhere. These men could give no recesses of the castle. The ramparts, there- 
satisfactory answers to her inquiries, but, fore, were almost her only retreat : and here 
being roused by them, gazed in stupid as- she lingered till the gray haze of evening was 
tonishment upon the long cavalcade. Madame spread over the scene. 

Montoni then, thinking it necessary to com- The cavaliers supped by themselves, and 

municate further the object of her alarm, sent Madame Ronton! remained in her apartment, 

Emily to say that she wished to speak to Mon- whither Emily went before she retired to her 

toni ; an errand her niece did not approve, for own. She found her aunt weeping, and in 

she dreaded his frowns, which she knew this much agitation. The tenderness of Emily 

message would provoke ; but she obeyed in was naturally so soothing, that it seldom 

silence. failed to give comfort to the drooping heart ; 

As she drew near the apartment in which he but Madame Montoni's was torn, and the 

sat with his guests, she heard them in earnest softest accents of Emily's voice were lost upon 

and loud dispute ; and she paused a moment, it. With her usual delicacy, she did not 

trembling at the displeasure which her sudden appear to observe her aunt's distress ; but it 

interruption would occasion. In the next, gave an involuntary gentleness to her manners, 

their voices sunk altogether ; she then ven- and an air of solicitude to her countenance, 

tured to open the door, and while Montoni which Madame Montoni w^s vexed to por- 

tumed hastily and looked at her without ceive, who seemed to feel the pity of her niece 

speaking, she delivered her message. to be an insult to her pride, and dismissed her 

! Tell Madame Montoni I am engaged,' said as soon as she properly could. Emily did not 

he. venture to mention again the reluctance she 

Emily then thought it proper to mention the felt to her gloomy chamber ; but she requested 

subject of her alarm. Montoni and his com- that Annette might be permitted to remain 

panions rose instantly and went to the win- with her until she retired to rest ; and the re- 

. dows ; but these not affording them a view of quest was somewhat reluctantly granted. Au- 

the troops, they at length proceeded to the nette, however, was now with the servants, 

rampartSi where Cavigni conjectured it to be and Emily withdrew alone. 
a .kgion of condottieri on their march towards With light and hasty steps she passed 

Modena. through the long galleries, while the feeble 

One part of the cavalcade now extended glimmer of the lamp she carried only showed 

along the valley, and another wound among the gloom around her, and the passing air 

the mountains towards the north, while some threatened to extinguish it. The lonely silence 

troops still lingered on the woody precipices, that reigned in this part of the castle, awed 

where the first had appeared, so that the her ; now and then, mdeed she heard a faint 

great length of the procession seemed to in- peal of laughter rise from a remote jjart of 

Sude a whole army. While Montoni and his the edifice, where the servants were assembled ; 

^iamily watched its progress, they heard the but it was soon lost, and a kind of breathless 

jsound of trumpets and the clash of cymbals stillness remained. As she passed the suite 

in die vale, and then others answering from of rooms which she had visited in the mom- 

the heights. Emily listened \Vith emotion to ing, her eyes glanced fearfully on the door, 

the shrill blast that awoke the echoes of the and she almost fancied she heard miumuring 

•mountains, and Montoni explained the signals, sounds within, but she paused not a moment 

with which he appeared to be well acquainted, to inquire. 

and which meant nothing hostile. 'The uni- Having reached her own apartment, where 

forms of the troops, and the kind of arms they no blazing wood on the hearth dissipated the 

bore, confirmed to him the conjecture of gloom, she sat down with a book to enliven her 

(Cavigni ; and he had the satisfaction to see attention till Annette should come, and a fire 

them pass by, without even stopping to gaze could be kindled. She continued to read till her 

upon his castle. He did not, however, leave light was nearly expired ; but Annette did not 

the rampart till the bases of the mountains appear, and the solitude and obscurity of her 

had shut them from his view, and the last chamber again affected her spirits, the more, 

murmur of the trumpet floated away on the because of its nearness to the scene of horror 

wind. Cavigni and Verezzi were inspirited by that she had witnessed in the morning, 

this spectacle, which seemed to have roused Gloomy and fantastic images came to her 

all the fire of their temper ; Montoni turned mind. She looked fearfully towards the door 

into the castle in thoughtful silence. of the staircase, and then examining whether it 

Emily's mind had not yet sufficiently re- was still fastened, found that it was so. Unable 
covered from its late shock to endure the to conquer the uneasiness she felt at the pro- 
loneliness of her chamber, and she remained spect of sleeping again in this remote and 
up on the ramparts : for Madame Montoni had insecure apartment, which some person 
not invited her to her dressing-room, whither seemed to have entered during the preceding 
she had gone evidently in low spirits ; and night, her impatience to see Annette, whom 
Emily, from her late experience, had lost all she had bidden tp inquire concerning this cir- 
wish to e:fplore the gloomy and mysterious cumstance, l)9came extremely painful. She 



123 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



' What ! not if I show you the verjr cannon 1 
Dear ma'am, you will believe nothing.' 

' Nothing probably upon this subject, but 
what I see,' said Enuly. 

' Well, ma'am, but you shall see it, if yoa 



Prav light me a fire immediately.' 

•My lady \(-an ted me, ma'amselle,' replied 
Annette in some confusion ; ' I will go and 
get the wood.' 

• No,' said Caterina. ' that is my business ; ' 
and left the room instantly : while Annette 
would have followed ; but being called back, 
she began to talk very loud, and laugh, and 
seemed to trust a pause of silence. 

Caterina soon returned with the wood : and 
then, when the cheerful blaze once more anima- you know, ma'am, I took a ttrange flBincy itt 
ted the room, and this serA^mt had withdrawn, see it, as I had heard such strange mnts about 
Emily asked Annette whether she had made it, and I got as far as the do<H', and should have 
the inquiry she bade her. ' Yes, ma'amselle,' opened it, if it had not been locked.' 
said Annette, ' but not a soul knows anything Emily, endeavouring to conceal the emo 
about the matter : and old Carlo — I watched tion this circumstance oceasioned, inquirad 
him well, for they say he knows strange at what hour she went to the ch^nber, and 
things — old Carlo looked so as I don't know found that it was soon after herself had beei 
how to tell ; and he asked me again and there. She also asked further questions, and 
again if I was sure the door was ever unfas- the answers convinced her that Annette, and 
tened. "Lord, "says I — "ami sure lam alive?" probably her informer, were ignorant of the 
Andasforme, ma'am, lam all astounded, as terrible truth, though in Annette's account 
one may say, and would no more sleep in this something very like the truth now and then 
chamber than I would on the great cannon at mingled with the falsehood. Emily now be- 
the end of the east rampart. ' gan to fear that her visits to the chamber 

' And what objection have you to that had been observed, since the door had been 
cannon, more than to any of the rest ?* said closed so immediately after her departure ; 
Emily smiling : ' the best would be rather a and dreaded lest this should draw upon her 
hard bed.' the vengeance of Montoni. Her anxiety, 

• Yes, ma'amselle. any of them would be also, was excited to know whence, and fat 
hard enough, for that matter ; but they do what purpose, the delusive report, which had 
say that something has been seen in the dead been impK>sed upon Annette, had originated ; 
of night standing beside the great canned, as since Montoni could only have wished for 
if to guard it.' silence and secrecy : but she felt that the sub- 

• Well ! my good Annette, the people who ject was too terrible for this lonely hour, and 
tell such stones are happy in having you for she compelled herself to leave it, to converse 
an auditor, for I perceive you believe them with Annette, whose chat, simple as it was, 

she preferred to the stillness of total solitude. 
Thus they sat till near midnight, but not 
without many hints from Annette that she 
wished to go. The embers were now nearly 
burnt out ; and Emily heard at a distance the 
thundering sound of the hall doors, as they 



all.' 

* Dear ma'amselle ! I will 
Very cannon ; you can see 
Windows ! ' 

•Well/ said Emily, 'but that does 
'*^Ke that an apparition guards it,' 



show you the 
it from these 



not 



wished also to question her as to the object 

which had excited so much horror in her own 

mind, and which Annette on the preceding 

evening had appeared to be in part acquainted 

vnih, though her words were very remote from 

the truth, and it appeared plainly to Emily will only step this way to the casement.' 

that the girl had been purposely misled by Emily could not forbear laughing, and 

a false report ; above all, she was surprised Annette looked surprised. Perceiving her es- 

that the door of the chamber, which contained treme aptitude to credit the marvelkMis, Emily 

it, should be left unguarded. Such an instance forbore to mention the subject she had in- 

of negligence almost surpassed belief. But tended, lest it should overcome her with ideal 

her light was now expiring ; the faint flashes terrors ; and she began to speak on a Uvdy 

it threw upon the walls called up all terrors of topic—the regattas of Venice. 

fancy, and she rose to find her way to the *Ay, ma'amselle, those rowhig matches,' 

habitable part of the castle before it was said Annette, 'and the fine moon-nghtn^ts, 

quite extinguished. are all that are worth seeing in Venice. To 

As she opened the chamber door, she be sure that moon is brighter than any I ent j 
heard remote voices, and soon after saw a saw ; and then to hear such sweet mnsic, too, ^ 
light tissue upon the further end of the as Ludovico has often and often simg under 
corridor, which Annette and another scr\ant the lattice by the west portico 1 Ma'amselk^ 
approached ' I am gbd you are come,' said it was Ludovico that told me about thepictuie 
Emily : ' what has detained you so long ? which you wanted so to look at last night, ! 

and — ' * 

'What picture?' said Emily, wisbfay 
Annette to explain herself. 

' O ! that terrible pktnre with the blafk 
veil over it' 

' You never saw it, then Y said Emily. 

* Who, I ! — No, ma'amselle, I never ^Hd 

But this morning,' continued Annette, lowo^ 

ing her voice and looking round the room, 

'this morning, as it was txoad day-light, do 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



1^3 



were shut for the night. She therefore pre- 
pared for rest, but was still unwilling that 
Annette should leave her. At this instant the 
great bell of the portal sounded. They 
listened in fearful expectation, when, after a 
long pause X)f silence, it sounded again. 
Soon after they heard the noise of carriage 
wheels in the court-yard. Emily sunk almost 
lifeless in her chair ;' It is the count,' said 
she. 

• What, at this time of night, ma'am ! ' said 
Annette : ' no, my dear lady. But, for that 
matter, it is a strange time of nigh^ for any- 
body to come ! ' 

' Nay, pr'ythee, good Annette, stay not 
talking,' said Emily in a voice of agony — 'go, 
pr'ythee go, and see who it is. ' 

Annette left the room, and carried with 

her the light, leaving Emily in darkness, 

which a few moments before would have 

terrified her in this room, but was now 

scarcely observed by her. She listened and 

waited in breathless expectation, and heard 

distant noises, but Annette did not return. 

Her patience at length exhausted, she tried 

to find her way to the corridor ; but it was 

long before she could touch the door of the 

chamber, and when she had opened it, the 

total darkness without made her fear to pro- 

: cced. Voices were now heard ; and Emily 

\ even thought she distinguished those of 

t Count Morano and Montoni. Soon after she 

I heard steps approaching ; and then a ray of 

I light streamed through the darkness, and 

I Annette appeared, whom Emily went to 

p meet. 

^ Yes, ma'amselle,' said she, ' you was right, 
^ it is the count, sure enough.' 
I • It is he,' exclaimed Emily, lifting her eyes 
I towards heaven, and supporting herself by 
r Annette's arm. 

f • Good Lord ! my dear lady, don't be in 
I such a fluster, and look so pale, we shall 
» Soon hear more.' 

I ' We shall, indeed I' said Emily, moving as 
I fast as she was able towards her apartment. 
' • I am not well, give me air.' Annette opened 
f a casement, and brought water, The faint- 
' ness soon left Emily, but she desired Annette 
Would not go till she heard from Montoni. 

• Dear ma'amselle ! he surely will not dis- 
: turb you at this time of night ; why be must 

think you are asleep.' ' 

•Stay with me till I am so. then,' said 
B^mily, who felt temporary relief from this 
Suggestion, which appeared probaUe enough, 
though her fears had prevented its occurring 
to her. Annette, with secret reluctance, con- 
sented to stay, and Emily was now composed 
onpugh to ask her some questions ; among 
others, ' whether she l;ad seen the count.' 

• Yes, ma'am, I saw bini alight, Cbr I went 
from hence to the grate in the north turret, 
that overlooks the inner court-yard, you 
know. There I saw the count's carriage, and 



the count in it, waiting at the great door— 
for the porter was just gone to bed — ^with 
several men on horseback, all by the light of 
the torches they carried.' 

Emily was compelled to smile. ' When the 
door was opened, the count said something 
that I could not make out, and then got out. 
and another gentleman wth him, I thought 
to be sure the signor was gone to bed, and I 
hastened away to my lady's dressing-room to 
see what I could hear, cut in the way I met 
Ludovico, and he told me that the signor was 
up, counselling with his master and me other 
signors in the room at the end of the north 
gallery ; and Ludovico held up his finger, and 
laid it on his lips, as much as to say — "There 
is more going on than you think of, Annette, 
but you must hold your tongue." And so I 
did hold my tongue, ma'amselle. and came 
away to tell you directly. ' 

Emily inquired who the cavalier was that 
accompanied the count, and how Montoni 
received them ; but Annette could not inform 
her. 

'Ludovico,' she added, 'had iust been to 
call Signor Montoni's valet, that he might teU 
him they were arrived, when I met him.' 

Emily sat musing for some time ; and then 
her anxiety was so much increased, that she 
desired Annette would go to the servants' hall, 
where it was possible she might hear some- 
thing of the count's intention respecting his 
stay at the castle. 

' Yes, ma'am,' said Annette with readiness ; 
' but how am I to find the way if I leave the 
lamp with you ?' 

Emily said she would light her : and they 
immediately quitted the chamber. When 
they had reached the top of the great staircase. 
Emily recollected that she might be seen by 
the count ; and to avoid the great hall. An- 
nette conducted her through some private 
passages to a back staircase which led (Urectly 
to that of the servants. 

As she returned towards her chamber. 
Emily began to fear that she might again lose 
herself in the intricacies of the castle, and 
again be shocked by some mysterious spec- 
tacle ; and though she was already perplexed 
by the numerous turnings, she feared to <^n 
one of the many doors th^ offered. While 
she stepped thoughtfully along, she fancied 
that she heard a low moaning at no great 
distance, and having paused a moment, she 
heard it again and distinctly. Several doors 
appeared on the right hand of the passage. 
She advanced, and listened. When she came 
to the second, she heard a voice, apparently 
in complaint, within, to which she continued 
to listen, afraid to open the door, ^nd uQwitfing 
to leave it. Convulsive sobs followed, and 
then the piercing accents of an agonicing 
spirit burst forth. Emily stood appalled, and 
looked through the gloom that surrounded 
her, in fearful expectation. The laiftentatiQiis 



1^4 '^^^ MVSTBklES OF ODOLPHO. 

continued. Pity now began to subdue terror ; ' I daresay it will be very loiig, ma'amselle,' 

it was possible she might administer comfort said Annette. 

to the sufferer, at least, by expressing sym- 'But before you go,' rejoined Emily, 'let 

pathy,- and she laid her hand on the door, me ask you — Had Signor Montoni left Cdunt 

While she hesitated, she thought she knew Morano when you quitted the hall ?' 

this voice, disguised as it was by tones of grief. • O no, ma'am, they were alone together.' 

Having therefore set down the lamp in the ' Have you been in my aunt's dressing-room 

passage, she gently opened the door, within since you left me ?' 

which all was dark, except that from an inner ' No, ma'amselle : I called at the door as I 

apartment a partial light appeared ; and she passed, but it was fastened ; so I thought my 

stepped softly on. Before she reached it, the lady was gone to bed. ' 

appearance of Madame Montoni, leaning on 'Who, then, was with your lady just now?" 

her dressing-table, weeping, and with a hand- said Emily, forgetting, in surprise, her usual 

kerchief held to her eyes, struck her, and she prudence. 

paused. ' Nobody, I believe, ma'am,' replied An- 

Some person was seated in a chair by the nette ; ' nobody has been with lier, I believe, . 
fire, but who it was she could not distinguish, since I left you. ' I 
He spoke now and then in a low voice, that Emily took no further notice of the subject; y 
did not allow Emily to hear what was uttered ; and after some struggle with imaginary fears, 
but she thought that Madame Montoni at her good nature prevailed over them so far, 
those times wept the more, who was too much that she dismissed Annette for the night. She 
. occupied by her own distress to observe Emily ; then sat musing upon her own circumstances 
while the latter, though anxious to know what and those of Madame Montoni, till her eye 
occasioned this, and who was the person ad- rested on the miniature picture wWch she had 
mitted at so late an hour to her aunt's dressing- found after her father's death among the 
room, forbore to add to her sufferings by sur- papers he had enjoined her to destroy. It was 
prising her, or to take advantage of her situa- open upon the table before her among some 
tion by listening to a private discourse. She loose drawings, having with them been taken 
therefore stepped softly back, and after some out of a little box by Emily some hours before: 
further difficulty found the way to her own The sight of it called up many interesting re- 
chamber, where nearer interests at length flections ; but the melancholy sweetness of the 
excluded the surprise and concern she had felt countenance soothed the emotions which these 
respecting Madame Montoni. had occasioned. It was the same style d 

Annette, however, returned without satis- countenance as that of her late father ; and 
factory intelligence ; for the servants, among while she gazed on it with fondness on this 
whom she had been, were either entirely account, she even fancied a resemblance in the 
ignorant, or affected to be so, concerning the features. But this tranquillity was suddenly 
count's intended stay at the castle. They could interrupted when she recollected the words in j 
talk only of the steep and broken road they the manuscript that had been found with this , 
had just passed, and of the numerous dangers picture, and which had formerly occasioned 
they had escaped, and express wonder how her so much doubt and horror. At length she 
their lord could choose to encounter all these roused herself from the deep reverie into which 
. in the darkness of night ; for they scarcely al- this remembrance had thrown her ; but when 
lowed that the torches had served for any she rose to undress, the silence and solitude to 
other purpose but that of showing the drcari- which she was left at this midnight hour, for 
ness of the mountains. Annette, finding she not even a distant sound was now heard, con- 
could gain no information, left them making spired with the impression the subject she had 
noisy petitions.for more wood on the fire, and been considering had giv-en to her mind to 
more supper on the table. appal her. Annette's bmts, too, concerning 

'And now, ma'amselle,' added she, 'lam this chamber, simple as they were, had not 

90 sleepy ! — I am sure if you was so sleepy you failed to affect her, since they followed a cir- 

would not desire me to sit up with you. ' cumstancc of peculiar horror which she herself 

Emily, indeed, began to think it was cmcl liad witnessed, and since the scene of this was 
to wish it ; she had also waited so long without a chamber nearly adjoining her own. 
receiving a summons from Montoni, that it ap- The door of the staircase was perhaps a 
peared he did not mean to disturb her at this subject of more reasonable alarm ; and she 
late hour, and she determined to dismiss An- now began to apprehend, such was the aptitude 
nette. But when she again looked round her of her fears, that this staircase had some pri- 
gloomy chamber, and recollected certain cir- vate communication with the apartment, 
cunistances, fear seized her spirits, and she which she shuddered even to remember. De- 
hesitated, termined not to undress, she lay down to sleep 

• ABd yet it were cruel of me to ask you to in her dothes, with her late father's dog, t^ 

-stay till I am asleep, Annette,' said she; 'for faithful Afiuichon, at the foot of the bed, 

/ fear it will be very long before 1 forget ray- whom she considered as a kind of guard. 
seWia. sleep, ' '\.\i>^ ^\xssxsas,\:issRsd^ she tried to banish ^^ 



THE MVSTEklES OP VDOLPHO, 



"5 



flection ; but her busy fancy would still hover 
over the subjects of her interest, and she 
heard the clodc of the castle strike two before 
she closed her eyes. 

From the disturbed slumber into which she 
then sunk, she was soon awakened by a noise 
which seemed to arise within her chamber ; 
but the silence that prevailed, as she fear- 
fully listened, inclined her to believe that she 
had been alarmed by such sounds as some- 
times occur in dreams, and she laid her head 
again upon the pillow. 

A return of the noise again disturbed her ; 
it seemed to come from that part of the room 
which communicated with the private stair- 
case, and she instantly remembered the odd 
circumstance of the door having been fastened, 
during the preceding night, by some unknown 
hand. Her late alarming suspicion concern- 
ing its communication also occurred to her. 
Her heart became faint with terror. Half- 
raising herself from the bed, and gently draw- 
ing aside the curtain, she looked towards the 
door of the staircase ; but the lamp that burnt 
on the hearth spread so feeble a light through 
the apartment, that the remote parts of it 
were lost in shadow. The noise, however, 
which she was convinced came from the door, 
continued. It seemed like that made by the 
drawing of rusty bolts, and often ceased, and 
was then renewed more gently, as if the hand 
that occasioned it was restrained by a fear of 
discovery. While Emily kept her eyes fixed 
on the spot, she saw the door move, and then 
slowly opened, and perceived something enter 
the room, but the extreme duskiness pre- 
vented her distinguishing what it was. Almost 
fainting with terror, she had yet sufficient 
command over herself to check the shriek that 
was escaping from her lips, and letting the 
curtain drop from her hand, continued to ob- 
serve in silence the motions of the mysterious 
form she saw. It seemed to glide along the 
remote obscurity of the apartment, then 
paused, and, as it approached the hearth, she 
perceived, in a stronger light, what appeared 
to be a human figure. Certain remembrances 
now struck upon the heart, and almost sub- 
dued the feeble remains of her spirit ; she 
continued, however, to watch the figure, which 
remained for some time motionless ; but then, 
advancing slowly towards the bed, stood 
silently at the feet, where the curtains, being 
a little open, allowed her still to see it ; terror, 
however, had now deprived her of the power 
of discrimination, as well as of that of utter- 
ance. 

Having continued there a moment, the form 
retreated towards the hearth, when it took the 
lamp, surveyed the chamber for a few moments, 
and then again advanced towards the bed. The 
light at that instant awakening the dog that 
had slept at Emily's feet, he barked loudly, 
and, jumping to the floor, flew at the stranger, 
who struck the animal smartly with a sheathed 



sword, and springing towards the bed, Erailv 
discovered — Count Morano ! 

She gazed at him for a moment in speech- 
less affright ; while he, throwing himself on 
his knee at the bed-side, besought her to fear 
nothing ; and, having thrown down his sword, 
would have taken her hand, when the facul- 
ties that terror had suspended suddenly re- 
turned, and she sprung from the bed in the 
dress which surely a lund of prophetic appre- 
hension had prevented her, on this night, from 
throwing aside. 

Morano rose, followed her to the door 
through which he had entered, and caught 
her hand as she reached the top of the stair- 
case, but not before she had discovered by a 
gleam of a lamp another man half-way down 
the steps. She now screamed in despair, and, 
believing herself given up by Montoni, saw, 
indeed, no possibility of escape. 

The count, who still held her hand, led her 
back into the chamber. 

' Why all this terror,' said he in a tremulous 
voice. • Hear me, Emily, I come not to alarm 
you ; no, by Heaven ! I love you too well — too 
well for my own peace.' 

Emily looked at him for a moment in fear- 
ful doubt. 

'Then leave me, sir,' said she, 'leave me 
instantly.' 

' Hear me, Emily,' resiuned Morano — 
' Hear me ! I love, and am in despair — ^yes 
— in despair. How can I gaze upon you, and 
know that it is, perhaps, for the last time, 
without suffering all the phrensy of despair ? 
But it shall not be so ; you shall be mine, in 
spite of Montoni and all his villany.' 

' In spite of Montoni !' cried Emily eagerly ; 
' what is it I hear ?' 

' You hear that Montoni is a villain,' 
exclaimed Morano with vehemence — ' a vil- 
lain who would have sold you to my love! 
— who — ' 

'And is he less who would have bought 
me?' said Emily, fixing on the count an eye 
of calm contempt. ' Leave the room, sir, 
instantly,' she continued in a voice trembling 
between joy and fear, 'or I will alarm the 
family, and you may receive that from Signor 
Montoni's vengeance which I have vainly 
supplicated from his pity. ' But Emily knew 
tfiat she was beyond the hearing of those who 
might protect her. 

' You can never hope anything from his 
pity,' said Morano ; ' he has us^ me infa- 
mously, and my vengeance shall pursue him. 
And for you, Emily, for you, he h^s new plans 
more profitable than the last, no doubt.' — The 
gleam of hope which the count's former 
speech had revived was now nearly extin- 
guished by the latter ; and while Emily's 
countenance betrayed the emotions of her 
mind, he endeavoured to take advantage of 
the discovery. 

' I lose time,' said he ; ' I came not to ex- 



laS 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



claim against Montoni : I came to solicit, to 
plead — to Emily ; to tell her all I suffer, to en- 
treat her to save me from despair, and herself 
fly from destruction. Emily ! the schemes of 
Montoni are unsearchable, but, I warn you, 
ihey are terrible ; he has no principle when 
interest or ambition leads. Can I love you, 
and abandon you to his power ? Fly, then, 
fly from this gloomy prison, with a lover who 
adores you I I have bribed a servant of the 
castle to open the gates, and before to-mor- 
row's dawn you shall be far on the way to Venice. ' 

Emily, overcome by the sudden shock she 
had received, — at the moment, too, when she 
had begun to hope for better days, — now 
thought she saw destruction surround her on 
every side. Unable to reply, and almost to 
thiuK, she threw herself into a chair, pale and 
breathless. That Montoni had formerly sold 
her to Morano, was va-y probable ; that he 
had now withdrawn his consent to the mar- 
riage, was evident from the count's present 
conduct ; and it was neariy certain that a 
scheme of stronger interest only could have 
induced the selfish Montoni to forego a plan 
which he had hitherto so strenuously pursued. 
These reflections made her tremble at the 
hints which Morano had just given, which she 
no longer hesitated to believe ; and while she 
shrunk from the new scenes of misery and 
oppression that might await her in the castle 
of Udolpho, she was compelled to observe, 
that almost her only means of escaping them 
was by submitting herself to the protection of 
this man, with whom evils more certain and 
not less terrible appeared — evils upon which 
she could not endure to pause for an instant. 

Her silence, though it was that of agony, 
encouraged the hopes of Morano, who 
watched her countenance with impatience, 
took again the resisting hand she had with- 
drawn, and, as he pressed it to his heart, 
again conjured her to determine immediately. 
' Every moment we lose will make our de- 
parture more dangerous,' said he : ' these few 
moments lost may enable Montoni to over- 
take us.* 

* I beseech you, sir, be silent,* said Emily 
faintly : ' I am indeed very wretched, and 
wretched I must remain. Leave me — I com- 
mand you, leave me to my fate.' 

' Never I ' cried the count vehemently : * let 
me perish first ! But forgive my violence I the 
thought of losing you is madness. You can- 
not be ignorant of Montoni's character ; you 
may be ignorant of his schemes — nay, you 
must be so, or you would not hesitate between 
my love and his power.' 

' Nor do I hesitate,' said Emily. 

•Let us go then,' said Morano, eag'erly 
kissing her hand, and rising ; ' my carriage 
waits below the castle walls.' 

' You mistake me, sir, ' said Emily. * Allow 

me to thank you for the interest you express in 

nijr welfare, and allow me to deddebymy 



own choice. I shall remain under the proteo 
tion of Signor Montoni. ' 

' Under his protection !' exclaimed Morano 
proudly — ' his protection I Emily, why will you 
suffer yourself to be thus deluded ? I have 
already told you what you have to e^cpect 
from his protection. ' 

' And pardon me, sir, if in this instance I 
doubt mere assertion, and, to be convinced, 
require something approaching to proof.' 

• I have now neither the time nor the me^ns 
of adducing proof,' replied the count 

' Nor have I, sir, the inclination to listen to 
it, if you had.' 

' But you trifle with my patience and my 
distress,' continued Momno. * Is a marriage 
with a man who adores you so very terrible in 
your eyes, that you would prefer to it all the 
misery to which Montoni may condemn you 
in this remote prison? Some wretch must 
have stolen those affections which ought to be 
mine, or you could not thus obstinately per- 
sist in refusing an ofier that would place you 
beyond the reach of oppression.' — Morano 
walked about the room with quick steps and 
a disturbed air. 

' This discourse. Count Morano, sufficiently 
proves that my affections ought not to be 
yours,' said Emily mildly ; ' and this conduct, 
that I should not be placed beyond the reac^ 
of oppression, so long as I remained in your 
power. If you wish me to believe otherwise, 
cease to oppress me by yoiu: presence. If 
you refuse this, you will compel me to expose 
you to the resentment of Signor Montoni. ' 

' Yes, let him come,' cried Morano furiously, 
' and brave my resentment ! Let him dare to 
face once more the man he has so courageously 
injured ; danger shall teach him morality, 
and vengeance justice — ^let him come, and re- 
ceive my sword in his heart.' 

The vehenqience with which this was uttered 
gave Emily new cause of alarm, who arose 
from her chair, but her trembling frame re- 
fused to support her, and she resumed her 
seat, — the words died on her lips, and when 
she looked wistfully towards the door of the 
corridor, which was locked, she considered it 
was impossible for her to leave the apartment 
before Morano would be apprized of, and 
able to counteract her intention. 

Without observing her agitation, he cou- 
tii^ued to pace the room in the utmost pertur- 
bation of spirits. His diorkened countenance 
expressed ail the rage of jealousy and revenge ; 
and a person who had seen his features imder 
the smile of ineffable tenderness, which he so 
lately assumed, would npw scarcely have 
believed them to be the same. 

' Count Morano,' said Emily, at length re- 
covering her voi,ce^ 'calm, I entreat you. tiiese 
transports, and listen to reason, if ;^ou wUl 
not to pity. You have equally misplacecl 
your love and your hatred. I never could 
have returned the afiEiection with which you 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 127 

honour me, and certainly have never en- Montoni had a richer priie In vi«w than gold, 

couraged it ; neither has Signor Montoni But he shall not live to Iriumph over me ! — 

injured you, for you must have known that he This very instant ' 

had no right to dispose of my hand, had he He was interrupted bjr tbc loud barking of 

even possessed the power to do so. Leave, the dog. 

then, leave the castle, while you may with safety. * Stay, Count Morano,' said Emily, terrified 

Spare yourself the dreadful consequences of an by his words and by the fury expressed in his 

unjust revenge, and the remorse of having pro- eyes, * I \»iH save you from this earror. — Of all 



turning towards her with a look of acrimony, servants to mv succour.' 

'Forboth.'repliedEniilyinatrembHngvoke. 'Assertion, replied Morano, 'at suoh a 

' Unjust revenge !' cried the count, resum- moment is not to be depended upon. How 

ing the abrupt tones of passion. ' Who, that could I suffer myself to doubt, even for an in- 

looks upon that face, can imagine a punish- stai>^, that he could see you, and not love ^-^ 

ment adequate to the injury he would have done But my first care shall be to convey vou from 

rae? Yes, I will leave the castle ; but it shall the castle. Cesario I ho, — Cesario I 

not be alone. I have trifled too long. Since A mail now appeared at the door of the 

my prayers and my sufferings cannot prevail, staircase, and other steps were heard ascend- 

force shall. I have people in waiting who ing. Emily uttered a loud shriek, as Moraoo 

shaJl convey you to my carriage. Your 'voice hiuried her across the chamber, and at the 

v^l bring no succour ; it cannot be heard same moment she heard a noise at the door 

from this remote part of the castle ; submit that opened upon the corridor. The count 

therefore, in silence, to go with me.' paused an instant, as if his mind was sus- 

Ifhls was an unnecessary injunction at pre- pended between love and the desire of ven- 

sent ; for Emily was too certain that her call geance ; and in that instant the door gave way, 

t^ould avail her nothing ; and terror had so and Montoni, followed by the old steward and 

entirely disordered ^er thoughts, that she knew several other persons, burst into the room, 

iiot how to plead to Morano but sat mute and * Draw I' cried MoHtoni to the cottnt ; who 

trembling in the chair, till he advanced to lift did not pause for a second bidding, but, 

her from it ; when she suddenly raised herself, giving Emily into the hands of the people 

and, witharepulsive gesture, and a countenance that appeared from the staireaae, turned 

of forced serenity, said : ' Count Morano, I am fiercely round. 

now in your power ; but you will observe, * This in thine heart, villain !' said he, as he 

that this is not the conduct which can win made a thrust at Montoni with his sword, who 

the esteem you appear so solicitous to obtain, parried the blow, and aimed another ; while 

and that you are preparing for yourself a load some of the persons who had foUowed him 

of remorse, in the miseries of a friendless into the room endeavoured to part the c(Mn- 

orphan, which can never leave you. Do you batants, and others rescued Emily from the 

believe your heart to be, indeed, so hardened, hands of Morano's servants, 

that you can look without emotion on the 'Was it for this. Count Morano,' said Mon- 

sufiering to which you would condemti me ? — ' loni, in a cool sarcastic tone <rf voice, ' that I 

Emily was interrupted by the grotfling of received you under my roof, and permitted 

the dog, who now came again from the bed ; you, though my declared enemy, to remain 

and Morano looked towards the door of the under it for the night? Was it that you might 

Staircase, where no person appearing, he rep^ my hospitality with the treachery of a 

caDed aloud, * Cesario I * fiCTid, and rob me erf my niece ?* 

' Emily,' said the count, • why will you re- ' Who talks of treachery ?* said Morano in 

duce me to adopt this conduct ? How much a tone of unrestrained vehemence ; ' let him 

more willingly would I ^rsuade, than com- that does, show an unblushing fece of inno- 

fel you to become my wife ! but, by heaven ! cence. Montoni, you are a viUain ! If there 
. will not leave you to be sold by Montoni. is treachery in this affair, look to yourself as 
Yet a thought glances across my mind that the author of it. 7/^— do I say? /—whom 
brings madness with it. I know not how to you have wronged with unexampled baseness, 
name it. It is preposterous — ^it cannot be. — whom you have injured almost b^ond re- 
Yet you tremble— you ctow pale f It is ! it is dress ! But why do I use words ? Come on, 
so ; — you— you— love Montoni X cried Morano, coward, and receive justice at my hands 1* 
grasping Emily's wrist, and stam|^in^ his foot ' Coward T cried Montoni, burstmg from 
on the floor. the people who held him, and rushing on the 

An involuntary air of surprise appeared on count ; when they both retreated into the 

her countenance. 'If you have indeed be- corridor, where the fight continued so despe- 

lieved so,' said she, ' believe so stfll.' ^tely, that none of the spectators dared ap- 

'That look, those words confirm it,' ex- x>roach them, Montoni swearing that the fet. 

claimed Morano furiously. 'No, no, no, whoiaterfec^s\\Q\3&dLi^'^\^^i«^^ 



xjB 



THE MYSTERiES OF UDOLPHO. 



JealcasT ar.i rerenge lent all their fury to 
Nfcr.ir.o. '^h*'.? the superior skill and the 
ten'.:vr."r..v of Montoni enabled him to wound 
h:s *^'.% erfv\n-. whom his senTints now at- 
ten'.p:i\i lo seire ; but he would not be 
i>rs:r.\ir.tNi. And. recfardless of his wound, con- 
tinu<^.l to t:t:hL He seemed to be insensible 
Ixxh of (Win and loss of blood, and alive only 
to the energy* of his passions. Montoni. on 
the contran-, persevered in the combat with a 
fierop yet w;ir>" \-alour ; he reofived the point 
of Mor.mo's sword on his arm ; but. almost 
in the sime instant, severely \*"ounded and 
disarmed him. The coimt then fell back into 
the arms of his sen-ant. while Montoni hold 
his sword ox-er him. and bade him ask his life. 
Morano. sinking under the anguish of his 
wound, had scarcely replied by a gesture, and 
by a few >K-ords feebly articulated, that he 
would not — ^when he fainted ; and Montoni 
^•as then going to ha\-e plunged the sword 
into his breast as he lay senseless, but hie arm 
^•as arrested by Cavigni. To the interruption 
he yielded without much difticultv; but his 
complexion changed almost to blackness as he 
looked upon his fallen adversar>'. and ordered 
that he should be carried instantly from the 
castle- 
In the meantime Elmily. who had been 
withheld from leaving the chamber during the 
afTmy, now came forward into the corridor, 
and pleaded a cause of common humanit}* 
with the feelings of the wannest benevolence, 
when she entreated Montoni to allow Momno 
the assistance in the castle which his situation 
required. But Montoni. who had seldom 
listened to pity, now seemed rapacious of 
vengeance, and. with a monster's cruelty, 
again ordered his defeated enemy to be uiken 
from the castle in his present state, though 
there were only the woods or a solitary neigh- 
bouring cottage to shelter him from the nis^ht. 
The count's servants having declaretl that 
they would noi move him tillhere\ived, Mon- 
toni stood iniictive. Ca\igni remonstrating, 
and Emily, superior to Montoni's menaces, 
giving water to Morano, and directing the at- 
tendants to bind up his wound. At length 
Montoni had leisure to feel pain from his o^vn 
hurt, and he withdrew to examine it 

The count, meanwhile, ha\ing slowly 
recowred, the first object that he saw on 
raising his eyes ^^•as Emily bending over him 
with a countenance strongly expressive of 
solicitude. He surveyed her with a look of 
anguish. 

* I have deservotl this,* said he. ' but not 
from Montoni. It is from you, Emily, that I 
have desorvwl punishment, vet I receive only 
pity !' He paused, for he liad spoken with 
difiiculty. Alter a moment he p|^)ceeded : ' I 
must resign you, but not to Montoni. For- 
give me the sufterings I have already occa- 
sioiiva yon I But for that villain— his infamy 
shall not go unpuuished. Carry me from this 



place.' said he to his servants. * I am in no 
condition to travel : you must, therefore, 
take me to the nearest cottage ; for I will not 
pass the night under his roof, although I may 
exjMre on the way from it.' 

Cesario proposed to go out and inqiure for 
a cottage that might receive his master befoze 
he attempted to remove him : but Morano 
\(-as impatient to be gone ; the anguish of his 
mind seemed to be even greater than that of 
his wound ; and he rejected with disdain the 
ofifer of Cavigni to entreat Montoni that he 
might be sufi'ered to pass the night in the 
castle. Cesario >%-as now going to call up the 
carriage to the great gate, but the count for- 
bade him. ' I cannot bear the motion of a 
carriage.' said he ; ' call some others of my 
people, that they may assist in bearing me in 
their arms.' 

At length, however, Morano submitted to 
reason, and consented that Cesario ^ookl 
first prepare some cottage to receive hinu 
Emily, now that he had recovered his senses, 
^-as about to withdraw from the corridor, 
when a message from Montoni conmianded 
her to do so, and also that 0ie count, if he 
was not already gone, should quit the castle 
immediately. Indignation flashed from 
Momno's eyes, and flushed his dieeks. 

' Tell Montoni,' said he, ' that I shaH go 
when it suits my own convenience; that I quit 
the castle he dares to call his, as I would the 
nest of a serpent, and that this is not the last 
he shall hear from me. Tell him, I wUl not 
leave another murder on his conscience if I 
can help it ' 

' Count Morano ! do you know what you 
say ?■ said Ca\igni. 

• Yes. Signor, I know well what I say, and 
he will understand well what I meatt His 
conscience >%ill assist his understanding on 
this occasion.' 

•Count Morano,' said Vereai, who had 
hitherto silently obser\'ed him, ' dare again to 
insult my friend, and I will plunge this sword 
in your body.' 

' It would be an action worthy the friend of 
a villain !' said Morano, as the strong impulse 
of his indignation enabled him to raise him- 
self from the arms of his servants ; but the 
energy ^"as momentary, and he sunk back ex- 
hausted by the effort — Montoni's people 
meanwhile held Verezzi, who seemed inclined 
even in this instant to execute his threats ; and 
Cavigni, who >%*as not so depraved as to abet 
the cowardly malignity of Verezzi, endeav- 
oured to withdraw him from the corridor ; and 
Emily, whom a compassionate interest had 
thus long detained, was now quitting it in new 
terror, when the supplicating voice of Morano 
arrested her, and by a feeble gesture he 
beckoned her to draw nearer. She advanced 
with timid steps, but the fainting languor of 
his countenance again awakened her pity and 
overcame her terror. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. Xd9 

'I am going from hence for ever/ said he attributed her stay in the corridor to a 
he : • perhaps I shall never see you again. I motive that had not even occurred to her art- 
would carry with me your forgiveness, Emily ; less mind. 

nay more — I would also carry your good 'This is an instance of female caprice,' said 
wishes.' ^ he, ' which I ought to have foreseen. Count 

'You have my forgiveness then,' * said Morano, whose suit you obstinately rejected 
Emily, ' and my sincere wishes for your so long as it was countenanced bv me, you 
recovery.' favour, it seems, since you find I have dis- 

•And only for my recovery ?' said Morano missed hina.' 
with a sigh. Emily looked astonished. ' I do not com- 

' For your general welfare,' added Emily. prehend you, sir,' said she, ' you certainly do 

* Perhaps I ought to be contented with not mean to imply, that the design of the 
this,' he resumed : ' I certainly have not de- count to visit the double chamber was founded 
served more; but I would ask you, Emily, upon any approbation of mine.' 
sometimes to think of me, and, forgetting my ' To that I reply nothing,' said Montoni ; 
offence, to remember only the passion which ' but it must certainly be a more than common 
occasioned it. I would ask, alas ! impossibili- interest that made you plead so warmly in his 
ties : I would ask you to love me ! At this cause, and that could detain you thus long 
moment, when I am about to part with in his presence, contrary to my express order 
you, and that perhaps for ever, I am scarcely — in the presence of a man whom you have 
m)rself. Emily — may you never know the hitherto on all occasions most scrupulously 
torture of a passion like mine ! What do I say? shunned. ' 

O Uiat for me you might be sensible of such ' I fear, sir, it was more than conmion in- 
a passion r terest that detained me,' said Emily calmly ; 

jEmily looked impatient to begone. ' I en- 'for of late I have been inclined to think tliat 
treat you^ count, to consult yoiu- own safety,' of compassion is an uncommon one. But 
^14 she, 'and linger here no longer. I tremble how could I, could >'^», sir, witness Count 
for the consequences of Signor Verezzi's pas- Morano's deplorable condition, and not wish 
sion, and of Montoni's resentment should he to relieve it ?' 

learn that you are still here.' ' You add hjrpocrisy to caprice,* said Mon- 

• Morano s face was overspread with a mo- toni frowning, ' and an attempt at satire to 
mentary crimson, his eyes sparkled, but he both ; ' but before you undertake to regulate 
seemed endeavouring to conquer his emotion, the morals of other persons, you should learn 
and replied in a calm voice, ' Since you are and practise the virtues which are indispen- 
interested for my safety, 1 will regard it, and sable to a woman — sincerity, uniformity of 
be gone. But, before I go, let me again hear conduct and obedieace. ' 
you say that you wish me well,' said he, fixing Emily, who had always endeavoured to regu- 
on her an earnest and momnful look. late her conduct by the nicest laws, and whose 

Emily repeated her assurances. He took mind was finely sensible not only of what is just 
her hand, which she scarcely attempted to in morals but of whatever is beautiful in the 
withdraw, and put it to his lips. 'Farewell, female character, was shocked by these words ; 
Count Morano 1 said Emily ; and she turned yet in the next moment her heart swelled with 
to go, when a second message arrived from the consciousness of having deserved praise 
Montoni, and she again conjured Morano, as instead of censure, and she was proudly silent 
be valued his life, to quit the castle immedi- Montoni, acquainted with the delicacy of her 
ately. He regarded her in silence, with a look mind, knew how keenly she would feel his re- 
of fixed despair. But she had no time to en- buke ; but he was a stranger to the luxury of 
force her compassionate entreaties, and, not conscious worth, and therefore did not foresee 
daring to disobey the second command of the energy of that sentiment which now re- 
Montoni, she left the corridor to attend him. pelled his satire. Tummg to a servant who 

He was in the cedar parlour that adjoined had lately entered the room, he asked whether 
the great hall, laid upon a couch, and suffer- Morano had quitted the castle. The naan 
ing a degree of anguish from his wound, answered that his servants were then removing 
which few persons could have disguised as he him on a couch to a neighbouring cottage. 
did. His countenance, which was stem, but Montoni seemed somewhat appeased on hear- 
calm, expressed the dark passion of revenge, ing this ; and when Ludovico appeared a few 
butnosymptomofpain;bodilypain, indeed, he moments after, and said that Morano was 
had always despised, and had yielded only to the gone, he told Emily she might retire to her 
strong and terrible energies of the soul. He apartment. 

was attended by old Carlo, and by Signor She withdrew willingly from his presence ; 
Bertolini, but Madame Montoni was not with but the thought of passing the remainder of 
him. the night in a chamber which the. door from 

Emily trembled as she approached and re- the staircase made liable to the intrusion of 
ceived his severe rebuke, for not having obeyed any person, now alarmed her more than ever ; 
his first summons ; and perceived, also, that and she determined to call a.1 Masiassssi'^^'^ 



X30 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



was then directed to the securing it on the 
inside also, by placing against it as much of 
the heavy furniture of the room as they could 
lift. . Emily then retired to bed, and Annette 
continued on a chair by the hearth, where 



toni's room, and request that Annette might was already fastened without ; and their <are 
be permitted to be with her. * '" ■ ' - ^ - 

On reaching the great gallery, she heard 
voices seemingly in dispute ; and her spirits 
now apt to take alarm, she paused, but soon 
distinguished some words of Cavigni and 

Verezzi, and went towards them in the hope some feeble embers remained, 
of conciliating their difference. They were 
alone. Verezzi' s face was still flushed with 
rage ; and as the "first object of it was now 
removed from him, he appeared willing to 
transfer his resentment to Cavigni, who seemed 
to be expostulating rather than disputing with 
him. 

Verezzi was protesting that he would 
instantly inform Montoni of the insult which 
Morano had thrown out against him, and 



CHAPTER XXL 

' or aery tongues, that syllable men's names 
On sands and shores and desert wdldemesses.' 

Milton. 



It is now necessary to 
circumstances which could 



mention some 
not be related 



above all, that wherein he had accused him of amidst the events of Emily's hasty departure 



murder. 

' There is no answering,' said Cavigni, ' for 
the words of a man in a passion ; little serious 
regard ought to be paid to them. If you 
persist in your resolution, the consequences 
may be fatal to both. We have now more 
serious interests to pursue than those of a 
petty revenge.' 

Emily joined 
arguments, and 



from Venice, or together vrith those which so 
rapidly succeeded to her arrival in the castle. 
On the morning of her journey, Count 
Morano had gone at the appointed hour to 
the mansion of Montoni to demand his bride. 
When he reached it, he was somewhat sur- 
prised by the silence and solitary air of the 
f)ortico where Montoni's lacqueys usually 
oitered ; but surprise was soon changed to 
they at length prevailed so astonishment, and astonishment to the rage 
far, as that Verezzi consented to retire with- of disappointment, when the door was opened 
out seeing Montoni. by an old woman, who told his servants that 

On calling at her aunt's apartment, she her master and his family had left Venice, ear^ 
found it fastened. In a few minutes, how- in the morning, for Terra-firma, Scarcely be- 
ever, it was opened by Madame Montoni her- lieving what his servants told, he left his 
self. gondola, and nished into the hall to inquire 

It may be remembered, that it was by a further. The old woman, who was the only 
door leading into the bed-room from a back person left in care of the mansion, persisted 
passage that Emily had secretly entered a in her story, which the silent and deserted 
few hours preceding. She now conjectured, apartments soon convinced him was no fiction, 
by the calmness of Madame Montoni's air, He then seized her vnth a menacing air, as 
that she was not apprized of the accident if he meant to wreak all his vengeance upon 
which had befallen her husband, and was be- her, at the same time asking her twenty ques- 
ginning to inform her of it in the tenderest tions in a breath, and all these with a gesticu- 
manner she could, when her aunt interrupted lation so furious that she was deprived of the 
her by saying ' she was acquainted with the power of answering them ; then suddenly 
whole affair.' letting her go, he stamped about the hallUke 

Emily knew, indeed, that she had little a madman, cursing Montoni and his own 
reason to love Montoni, but could scarcely folly. 

have believed her capable of such perfect When the good woman was at liberty, and 
apathy as she now discovered towards him : had somewhat recovered from her fright, she 



having obtained permission, however, for 
Annette to sleep in her chamber, she went 
thither immediately. 

A track of blood appeared along the corridor 
leading to it : and on the spot where the 
count and Montoni had fousrht the whole floor 



told him all she knew of the affair, which was 
indeed very little, but enough to enable 
Morano to discover that Montoni was gone to 
his castle on the Apennine. Thither he fol- 
lowed, as soon as his servants could complete 
the necessary preparation for the journey, 



was stained. Emily shuddered, and leaned accompanied by a friend, and attended by a 
on Annette as she passed. When she reached number of his people, determined to obtain 
her apartment, she instantly determined, since Emily or a full revenge on Montoni. When 



the door of the staircase had been left open, 
and that Annette was now with her, to ex- 
plore whither it led, — a circumstance now 
materially connected with her own safety. 
Annette accordingly, half curious and half 
afraid, proposed to descend the stairs ; buioiv 
approaching the door they perceived \iial it 



his mind had recovered from the first efferve- 
scence of rage, and his thoughts became less 
obscured, his conscience hinted to him certain 
circumstances which in some measure ex- 
plained the conduct of Montoni ; but how 
the latter could have been led to suspect an 
m\.ewv\0Ti >n\\\Ocv \v^ \v^^ \5st\xftved was knowa 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



X3« 



only to himself, he could not even guess. On 
this occasion, however, he had been partly 
betrayed by that sympathetic intelligence 
which may be said to exist between bad minds, 
and which teaches one man to judge what 
another will do in the same circumstances. 
Thus it was with Montoni, who had now re- 
ceived indisputable proof of a truth which he 
had some time suspected — that Morano's 
circumstances, instead of being affluent, as he 
had been bidden to believe, were greatly in- 
volved. Montoni had been interested in his 
suit by motives entirely selfish, those of 
avarice and pride ; the last of which would 
have been gratified by an alliance with a 
Venetian nobleman, the former by Emily's 
estate in Gascony, which he had stipulated, as 
the price of his favour, should be delivered up 
to him from the day of her marriage. In the 
mean time he had been led to suspect the con- 
. sequence of the count's boundless extrava- 
gance ; but it was not till the evening preced- 
ing the intended nuptials that he obtained 
certain information of his distressed circum- 
stances. He did not hesitate then to infer 
that Morano designed to defraud him of 
Emily's estate ; andin this supposition he was 
confirmed, and with apparent reason, by the 
subsequent conduct of the count, who, after 
having appointed to meet on that night for 
the purpose of signing the instrument which 
was to secure to him his reward, failed in his 
engagement. Such a circumstance, indeed, 
in a man of Morano's gay and thoughtless 
character, and at a time when his mind was 
engaged by the bustle of preparation for his 
nuptials, might have been attributed to a 
cause less decisive than design : but Montoni 
did not hesitate an instant to interpret it his 
own way ; and after vainly waiting the count's 
arrival for several hoiu-s, he gave orders for 
his people to be in readiness to set off at a 
moment's notice. By hastening^ to Udolpho 
he intended to remove Emily from the reach 
of Morano, as well as to break off the affair 
without submitting himself to useless alterca- 
tion : and if the count meant what he called 
honoiu"ably, he would doubtless follow Emily 
^and sign the writings in question. If this 
was done, so little consideration had Montoni 
for her welfare, that he would not have scrupled 
to sacrifice her to a man of ruined fortune, 
since by that means he could enrich himself ; 
and he forbore to mention to her the motive 
of his sudden journey, lest the hope it might 
revive should render her more intractable 
when submission would be required. 

With these considerations he had left Venice ; 
and with others totally different, Morano 
had soon after pursued his steps across the 
rugged Apennines. When his arrival was 
announced at the castle, Montoni did not 
believe that he would have presumed to show 
iiiniself, unless he had meant to fulfil his en- 
£:j;i^cmcnt, and he therefore readily admitted 



him ; but the enraged countenance and ex- 
pressions of Morano as he entered the apart- 
ment, instantly undeceived him ; and when 
Montoni had explained in part the motives 
of his abrupt departure from Venice, the count 
still persisted in demanding Emily and re- 
proaching Montoni, without even naming the 
former stipulation. 

Montoni, at length weary of the dispute, 
deferred the settling of it till the morrow, 
and Morano retired with some hope suggested 
by Montoni's apparent indecision. When, 
however, in the silence of his own apartment, 
he began to consider the past conversation, 
the character of Montoni, and some former 
instances of his duplicity, the hope which he 
had admitted vanished, and he determined 
not to neglect the present possibility of ob- 
taining Emily by other means. To his con- 
fidential valet he told his design of carrying 
away Emily, and sent him back to Montoni's 
servants to find out one among them who 
might enable him to execute it. The choice 
of this person he intrusted to the fellow's own 
discernment, and not imprudently ; for he 
discovered a man whom Montoni had on some 
former occasion treated harshly, and who was 
now ready to betray him. This man con- 
ducted Cesario round the castle, through a 
private passage, to the staircase that led to 
Emily's chamber ; then showed him a short 
way out of the building, and afterwards pro- 
cured him the keys that would secure his 
retreat. The man was well rewarded for his 
trouble : how the count was rewarded for his 
treachery has already appeared. 

Meanwhile old Carlo had overheard two of 
Morano's servants, who had been ordered to 
be in waiting with the carriage beyond the 
castle walls, expressing their surprise at their 
master's sudden and secret departure, for the 
valet had entrusted them with no more of 
Morano's designs than it was necessary for 
them to execute. They, however, indulged 
themselves in surmises, and in expressing 
them to each other; and from these Carlo 
had drawn a just conclusion. But before he 
ventured to disclose his apprehensions to 
Montoni, he endeavoured to obtain further 
confirmation of them, and for this purpose 
placed himself, with one of his fellow-servants, 
at the door of Emily's apartment that opened 
upon the corridor. He did not watch long in 
vain, though the growling of the dog had once 
nearly betrayed him. When he was convinced 
that Morano was in the room, and had listened 
long enough to his conversation to understand 
his scheme, he immediately alarmed Montoni, 
and thus rescued Emily from the designs oi' 
the count. 

Montoni on the following morning appeared 
as usual, except that he wore his woimded 
arm in a sling ; he went out upon the ram- 
parts, overlooked the men employed in repair- 
ing them, gave orders for additional work- 



13* 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



men, and then came into the castle to give them for banditti amid the mountain-^ew of 

audience to several persons who were just her picture ; when she had finished which, 

arrived, and who were shown into a private she was surprised to observe the spirit off her 

apartment, where he communicated with them group. But she had copied from nature, 

fornear an hour. Carlo was then summoned, Carlo, when he had placed refreshment 

and ordered to conduct the strangers to a before these men in the apartment assigned to 

part of the castle which in former times had them, returned, as he was ordered, to Mon- 

been occupied by the upper servants of the toni, who was anxious to discover by what 

family, and to provide them with every neccs- servant the keys of the castle had been 

sary refreshment. When he had done this, delivered to Morano on the preceding night 

he was bidden to return to his master. But this man, though he was too fjaithful to 

Meanwhile the count remained in a cottage his master to see him quietly injured, would 
in the skirts of the woods below, suffering not betray a fellow-servant even to justice ; he 
under bodily and mental pain, and meditating therefore pretended to be ignorant who it 
deep revenge against Montoni. His servant, was that had conspired with Count Morano, 
whom he had dispatched for a surgeon to the and related, as before, that he had only over- 
nearest town, which was, however, at a con- heard some of the strangers describing the 
siderable distance, did not return till the fol- plot. 

fowing day; when, his wounds being examined Montoni's suspicions naturally fell upon the 

and dressed, the practitioner refused to deliver porter, whom he ordered now to attend. Cario 

any positive opinion concerning the degree of hesitated, and then with slow steps went to 

danger attending them ; but giving his patient seek him. 

a composing draught, and ordering him to be Bamardine, the porter, denied the accusa- 

kept quiet, he remained at the cottage to tion with a countenance so steady and un- 

watch the event. daunted, that Montoni could scarcely believe 

Emily for the remainder of the late eventful him guilty, though he knew not how to think 

night had been suffered to sleep undisturbed ; him innocent. At length the man was dis- 

and when her mind recovered from the con- missed from his presence, and, though the real 

fusion of slumber, and she remembered that offender, escaped detection, 

she was now released from the addresses of Montoni then went to his wife's apartment, 

Comit Morano, her spirits were suddenly re- whither Emily followed soon afto" ; but, find- 

liered from a part of the terrible anxiety that ing them in high dispute, was instantly leaving 

had long oppressed them : that which re- the room, when her aunt called her lMu:k, and 

mained arose chiefly from a recollection of desired her to stay. — ' You shall be a witness,' 

Morano's assertions concerning the schemes said she, ' of my opposition. Now, sir, re- 

of Montoni. He had said that the plans of peat the command I have so often refused to 

the latter concerning Emily were unsearchable, obey. ' 

yet that he knew them to be terrible. At the Montoni turned with a stem countenance to 

time he uttered this, she almost believed it to Emily, and bade her quit the apartment, whUe 

be designed for the purpose of prevailing with his wife persisted in desiring that she would 

her to throw herself into his protection, and stay. Emily was eager to escape from this 

she still thought it might be chiefly so ac- scene of contention, and anxious also to sctvc 

counted for : but his assertions had left an her aunt ; but she despaired of conciliating 

impression on her mind, which a considera- Montoni, in whose eyes the rising tempest of 

tion of the character and former conduct of his soul flashed terribly. 

Montoni did not contribute to efface. She ' Leave the room,' said he in a voice of 

however checked her propensity to anticipate thunder. Emily obeyed ; and walking down 

evil ; and, determined to enjoy this respite to the rampart which the strangers had now 

from actual misfortune, tried to dismiss left, continued to meditate on the unhappy 

thought, took her instruments for drawing, marriage of her father's sister, and on her own 

and placed herself at a window to select into desolate situation, occasioned by the ridicu- 

a . landscajDe some features of the scenery lous imprudence of her whom she had always 

without. wished to respect and love. Madame Mon- 

As she was thus employed, she saw walking toni's conduct had, indeed, rendered it im- 

on the rampart below the men who had so possible for Emily to do either ; but her gentle 

lately arrived at the castle. The sight of heart was touched by her distress, and in the 

strangers surprised her, but still more of pity thus awakened she forgot the injurious 

strangers such as these. There .was a singu- treatment she had received from her. 

larity in their dress, and a certain fierceness As she sauntered on the rampart, Annette 

in their air, that fixed all her attention. She appeared at the hall door, looked cautiously 

withdrew from the casement while they passed, round, and then advanced to meet her. 

but soon returned to observe them fm-ther. • Dear Ma'amselle, I have been looking for 

Their fibres seemed so well suited to the you all over the castle,' said she. • If you 

^ildness of the surrounding objects, thai, as will step this way I \vill show you a pic- 

uiey stood surveying the castle, she skeXcVvciOi. X\3Lr^.' 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



>3^ 



' A picture 1' exclaimed Emily, and shud 
tiered. 

' Yes, ma'am, a picture of the late lad^ 
of this pljice. Old Carlo just now told me it 
was her, and I thought you would be curious 
to see it. As to my lady, you know, ma'am- 
selle, one cannot talk about such things to 
her.' 

* And so,' said Emily smilingly, 'as you must 
talk of them to somebody — ' 

' Why, yes, ma'amselle ; what can one do 
in such a place as this if one must not talk ? 
If I was in a dungeon, if they would let me 
talk — ^it would be some comfort ; nay, I would 
talk, if it was only to the walls. But come, 
ma'amselle, we lose time — let me show you 
the picture. ' 

' Is it veiled ?' said Emily, pausing. 

' Dear ma'amselle !' said Annette, fixing her 
eyes on Emily's face, ' what makes you look 
so pale ? — are you ill ?' 

' No, Annette, I am well enough, but I have 
no desire to see this picture. Return into the 
hall.' 

' What, ma'am, not to see the lady of this 
castle ?' said the girl ; ' the lady who disap- 
peared so strangely ? Well ! now, I would 
have run to the furthest mountain we can see, 
yonder, to have got a sight of such a picture ; 
and, to speak my mind, that strange story is all 
that makes me care about this old castle, 
though it makes me thrill all over, as it were, 
whenever I think of it.' 

* Yes, Annette, you love the wonderful ; but 
do you know that, unless you guard against 
this inclination, it will lead you into ^1 the 
misery of superstition ?' 

Annette might have smiled, in her turn, at 
this sage observation of Emily, who could 
tremble with ideal terrors as much as herself, 
and listen almost as eagerly to the recital of 
a mysterious story. Annette urged her re- 
quest. 

' Are you sure it i*a picture ?' said Emily. 
' Have you seen it? — Is it veiled?* 

* Holy Maria ! ma'amselle, yes, no, yes. I 
am sure it is a picture — I have seen it, and it 
is not veiled. ' 

The tone and look of surprise with which 
this was uttered, recalled Emily's prudence ; 
who concealed her emotion under a smile, and 
bade Annette lead her to the picture. It was 
in an obscure chamber adjoining that part of 
the castle allotted to the servants. Several 
other portraits hung on the walls, covered like 
this with dust and cob-web. 

That is it, ma'amselle,* said Annette in a 
low voice, and pointing. Emily advanced and 
surveyed the picture. It represented a 
lady in the flower of youth and beauty ; her 
features were handsome and noble, fidl of 
strong expression, but had little of the capti- 
vating sweetness that Emily had looked for, 
and still less of the pensive mildness she loved. 
It was a countenance which spoke the 



language of passion rather than that of senti- 
ment ; a haughty impatience of misfortune — 
not the placid melancholy of a spirit injured, 
yet resigned. 

' How many years have passed since this 
lady disappeared, Annette ?' said Emily. 

' Twenty years, ma'amselle, or thereabout, 
as they tell me ; I know it is a long while 
ago.* Emily continued to gaze upon Uie por- 
trait. 

'I think,' resumed Annette, 'the signor 
would do well to hang it in a better place than 
this old chamber. Now, in my mind, he 
ought to place the picture of a lady who gave 
him all these riches, in the handsomest room 
in the castle. But he may have good reascns 
for what he does : and some people do 5 ay 
that he has lost his riches as well as his gratitude^ 
' But hush, ma'am, not a word I' added Ail* 
nette, laying her finger on her lips. — Emily 
was too much absorbed in thought to hear 
what she said. 

• 'Tis a handsome lady, I am sure,* continued 
Annette : ' the signor need not be ashamed to 
put her in the great apartment, where the 
veiled picture hangs.' Emily turned roimd. 

• But for that matter, she would be as little seen 
there as here, for the door is always locked, I 
find.' 

• Let us leave the chamber,' said Emily : 

• and let me caution you again, Annette ; bd 
guarded in your conversation, and never 
tell that you know anything of that picture.* 

' Holy Mother!' exclaimed Annette, ' it is no 
secret ; why all the servants have seen it 
already !* 

Emily started. 'How is this?* said she — 

• Have seen it ! When ? — how ?' 

• Dear ma'amselle, there is nothing surpris- 
ing in that ; we had all a little more curiouS' 
ness than you had.' 

• I thought you told me the door was kept 
locked y said Emily. 

• If that is the case, ma'amselle,' replied 
Annette, looking about her, ' how could we 
get here ?' 

• O, you mean this picture,' said Enr^ly 
with returning calmness. 'Well, Annette, 
here is nothing more to engage my attention ; 
we will go.' 

Emily, as she passed to her own apartnlent, 
saw Montoni go down to the hall, and she 
turned into her aunt's dressing-room, whom 
she found weeping and alone, grief and re- 
sentment struggling on her countenance. 
Pride had hitherto restrained complaint,^ 
Judging of Emily*s disposition from her own/ 
and from a consciousness of what her treat- 
ment of her deserved, she had believed tb^t 
her griefs would be cause of triumph to her 
niece, rather than of sympathy; that she 
would despise, not pity her. But she knew 
not the tenderness and benevolence of Emily's 
heart, that had always ta.\i%ViV \\r.x vck ^ax^jiv. 
her own m\\aiV^s m ^'a is^^oiSaaBCk.^^ '2»'^ 



w 



THE MYSTEI^lJ^S OF UDOLPUO. 



her onetnjr. The sufferings of others, who- 
ever ihoy' might be, called forth her ready 
compassion, which dissipated at once every 
obscuring cloud to goodness, that passion or 
prciiidice might have raised in her mind. 

Madame Montoni's suflerings at length rose 
above her pride ; and when Eniily h.ad before 
entered the room, she would have told them 
an, had not her husband prevented her : now 
that she w;is no longer restrained by his pre- 
sence, she poured forth all her complaints to 
her niece. 

• O Emily !' she exclaimed, ' I am the most 
wretched of women — I am indeed cruelly 
treated ! XVho, with my prospects of happi- 
ness, could have foreseen such a wTetchcd 
&te as this ? — w ho could have thought, when 
I married such a man as the signor, that I 
should ever have to bewail my lot ? Dut there 
is no judging what is for the'best — there is no 
knowing w hat is for our good ! The most 
flattering prospects often change — the best 
judgments may be deceived — who could have 
KMtiseen, when I married the signor, that I 
should ever repent my generosity f ' 

Emily thought she might have foreseen it, 
but this was not a thought of triumph. She 
placed herself in a chair near her aunt, took 
her hand, and with one of those looks of soft 
compassion which might characterise the coun- 
tenance of a guardian angel, spoke to her in 
the tenderest accents. But these did not 
sootlic Madame Montoni, whom impatience 
to talk made imwilling to listen. She \N'anted 
to complain, not to be consoled ; and it was 
by e.xclamations of complaint only that 
Emily learned the particular circumstances of 
her affliction. 

* Ungrateful man ! ' said Madame Montoni, 
*he has deceived me in every- respect ; and 
now he has taken me from my countr)- and 
friends, to shut me up in this old castle : 
and here he thinks he can compel mc to do 
w hatevcr he designs ! But he shall find him- 
self mistaken, he shall find that no threats 

can alter But who would have believed, 

who would have supposed, that a man of his 
family and apparent wealth had absolutely no • 
fortune?— no, scarcely a sequin of his own ! 
I did all for the best ; I thought he was a 
man of consequence, of great propcrtv, or I 
am sure I would never have married him, — 
ungrateful, artful man ! IShc paused to take 
breath. ' 

• ti' ^^^^ mi^dam, be composed,' said Emily : 

"le signor may not be so rich as you had 

«^on to expect ; but surely he cannot be 

Xri?^^' ^'"^^ ^^'s castle and Uie mansion 

are the 



Sx^m.?!'''^ H^- ^^^y ^ ^sk what cu. . 
^'^^jstances that parUcularly aflect you ?' 

Madame \^ }^^. circumstances !' exclaimed 
*sitnotsi,ffi " °^\'^^^^^ resentment: 'why, 

*^«ce lost w^?V^u^y P^^>'' ^"d that he has 
*^nat I brought him-and \."hal wonv 



he would compel me to sign awdy my settle* 
ment (it was well I had the chief of my pro- 
perty settled on m5rself!) that he may lose 
Uiis also, or throw it away in wild schemes 
vrhidh nobody can imderstand but himself? 
And, and is not all this sufficient ?' 

• Ti is indeed,' said Emily ; ' but you must 
recollect, dear madam, that I knew nothing 
of all this.' 

• Well ; and is it not sufficient,' rejoined her 
aunt, ' that he is also absolutely ruined, that he 
is sunk deeply in debt, and that neither this 
castle nor the mansion at Venice is his own, 
if all his debts, honourable and dishonour- 
able, were paid.' 

• I am shocked by what you tell me, madam,' 
said Emily. 

• And is it not enough,* interrupted Madame 
Montoni, ' that he has treated me with n^- 
lect, with cruelty, because I refused to re- 
linquish my settlements, and, instead of being 
frightened at his menaces, resolutely ddfi^ 
him, and upbraided him with his shameful 
conduct? But I bore all meekly, — ^you know, 
niece, I never uttered a word of complaint 
till now ; no ! That such a disposition as 
mine should be so imposed upon ! That I, 
whose only faults are too much kindn^s, too 
much generosity, should be chained for Ufe to 
such a vile, deceitful, cruel monster ! ' 

Want of breath compelled Madame Mon- 
toni to stop. If any such thing could have 
made Emily smile in these moments, it would 
have been this speech of her aunt, delivered in 
a voice very little below a scream, and with 
a vehemence of gesticulation of countenance 
that turned the whole into burlesque. Emily 
saw that her misfortunes did not admit <rf 
real consolation, and contemning the com- 
monplace terms of superficial comfort, she 
was silent ; while Madame Montoni; jealous 
of her own consequence, mistook this for the 
silence of indifference or of contempt, and 
reproached her with a want of duty and feeling. 

' O ! I suspected what all this boasted sensi- 
bility would prove to be,' rejoined she; 'I 
thought it would not teach you to feel either 
duty or affection for your relations, who have 
treated you like their own daughter. ' 

• Pardon me madam,' said Emily mildly, * it 
is not natural to me to boast, and if it was, I 
am sure I would not boast of sensibility-^ 
quality, perhaps, more to be feared than 
desired. ' 

•Well, well, niece, I will not dispute with 
you. But, as I said, Montoni threatens rac 
with violence, if I any longer refuse to sign 
away my settlements, and this was the sub- 
ject of our contest when you came into the 
room before. Now I am determined no 
power on earth shall make me do this. Neither 
will I bear all this tamely.- He shall hear his 
true character from me ; I will tell him all he 
deserves, in spite of his threats and cruel 
V'-Qtvt.ment. ' 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, X35 

Emily seized a pause of Madame Mon- so you would persuade me that I have no 

toni's voice to speak. ' Dear madam,' said reason to complain, that the signor is in very 

she, 'but will not this serve to irritate the flourishing circumstances, that my future 

signor unnecessarily? Willit not provoke the prospects promise nothing but comfort, and 

harsh treatment you dread ? ' that my griefs are as fanciful and romantic 

• I do not care,' replied Madame Montoni ; as your own ! Is it the way to console me to 
* it does not signify ; I will not submit to such endeavoiu" to persuade me out of my senses 
usage. You would have me give up my and my feelings, because you happen to 
settlements, too, I suppose ? ' have no feelings yourself? I thought I was 

* No, madam, I do not exactly mean that.' opening my heart to a person who could sym- 
' What is it you do mean, then ? ' pathi^ in my distress, but I find that your 

* You spoke of reproaching the signor,' said people of sensibility can feel for nobody but 
Emily with hesitation. themselves ! You may retire to your cham- 

' Why, does he not deserve reproaches?' said ber.' 

her aunt. Emily, without replying, immediately left 

' Certainly he does ; but will it be prudent the room, with a mingled emotion of pity and 

in you, madam, to make them ? ' contempt, and hastened to her own, where she 

'Prudent!' replied Madame Montoni. 'Is yielded to the mournful reflections which a know- 

this a time to talk of prudence, when one is ledge ofheraunt's situation had occasioned. The 

threatened with all sorts of violence. ' conversation of the Italian with Valancourt in 

' It is to avoid that violence that prudence is France again occurred to her. His hints res- 
necessary,' said Emily. pecting the broken fortunes of Montoni were 

'Of prudence!' continued Madame Mon- now completely justified : those also concerning 

toni, without attending to her ; ' of prudence his character appeared not less so, though the 

towards a man who does not scruple to break particular circumstances connected with his 

all the common ties of humanity in his con- fame, to which the stranger had alluded, yet 

duct to me ! And is it for me to consider remained to be explained. Notwithstandmg 

■ prudence in my behaviour towards him ? I am that her own observations, and the words of 

not so mean.' Count Morano, had convinced her that Mon- 

• It is for your own sake, not for the signor's, toni's situation was not what it formerly ap- 
madam,' said Emily modestly, 'that you peared to be, the intelligence she had just 
should consult prudence. Your reproaches, received from her aunt on this point ilruck her 
however just, cannot punish him ; but they with all the force of astonishment, which was 
may provoke him to further violence against not weakened when she considered the present 
you.' style of Montoni's living, the number of ser- 

' What I would you have me submit then to vants he maintained, and the new. expenses he 
whatever he commands — would you have me was incurring by repairing and fortifying his 
kneel down at his feet, and thank him for his castle. Her anxiety for her aunt and for her- 
cruelties ? Would you have me give up my self increased with reflection. Several asser- 
settlement?' tions of Morano, which on the preceding 

' How much you mistake me, madam 1' said night she had believed. were prompted either 
Emily ; ' I am unequal to advise you on a point by interest or by resentment, now returned to 
so important as the last : but you will pardon her mind with the strength of truth. She 
me for saying that, if you consult your own could not doubt that Montoni had formerly 
peace, you will try to conciliate Signor Mon- agreed to give her to the count for a pecuniary 
toni, rather than to irritate him by reproaches.' reward ; — his character and his distressed cir- 

' Conciliate, indeed ! I tell you, niece, it is cumstances justified the belief ; these, also, 
utterly impossible : I disdain to attempt it.' seemed to confirm Morano's assertion, that he 

Emily was shocked to observe the perverted now designed to dispose of her, more advan- 
imderstanding and obstinate temper of Ma- tageously for himself, to a richer suitor, 
dame Montoni ; but not less grieved for her Amidst the reproaches which Morano had 
- sufferings, she looked round for some allevia- thrown out against Montoni, he had said — ^he 
ting circumstance to offer her. ' Your situation would not quit the castle he dared io call his, 
is perhaps not so desperate, dear madam,' nor willingly leave another murder on his 
said Emily, ' as you may imagine.- The sig- conscience — hints which might have no other 
nor may represent his affairs to be worse than origin than the passion of the moment : but 
they are, for the purpose of pleading a stronger Emily was now inclined to account for them 
necessity for his possession of your settlement, more seriously, and she shuddered to think 
Besides, so long as you keep this, you may that she was in the hands of a man to whom 
look forward to it as a resource, at least, that it was even possible they could apply. At 
will afford you a competence, should the sig- length, considering that reflection coifld nei- 
nor's future conduct compel you to sue for ther release her from her melancholy situation 
separation . ' nor enable her to bear it with greater fortitude, 

Madame Montoni impatiently interrupted she tried to divert her anxiety, and took, danrcv 
l^er. • Uufpeling, cruel girl !' said she ; 'and frpra U<;i:UtU'^U\K^^«.N^\s\a<i\N^^^^^K*5s<SK^ 



136 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

Ariostol But his wild imagery and rich in- mistaking the cause of her displeasure, imme- 
vention could not long enchant her attention-; diately began to excuse the count in her way. 
his spells did not reach her heart, and over * To be sure, it was very ungenteel behaviour,' 
her sleeping fancy they played without said she, ' to break into a lady's room, and 
awakening it. then, when he found his discoursing was not 

She now put aside the book, and took her agreeable to her, to refuse to go ; and theft, 
lute, for it was seldom that her sufferings re- when the gentleman of the castle comes to 
fused to yield to the magic of sweet, sounds ; desire him to walk about his business — ^to turn 
when they did so, she was oppressed by round, and draw his sword, and swear he'll 
sorrow, that came from excess of tenderness run him through the body ! To be sure, it 
and regret ; and there were times when music was very ungenteel behaviour ; but then he was 
had increased such sorrow to a degree that disguised in love, and so did not know what 
was scarcely endurable; when, if it had not he was about.' 

suddenly ceased, she might have lost her ' Enough of this,' said Emily, who now 
reason. Such was the time when she mourned smiled without an effort ; and Annette re- 
for her father, and heard the midnight strains tiimed to a mention of the disagreement 
that floated by her window, near the convent between Montoni and her lady. * It is 
in I^nguedoc, on the night that followed his nothing new,' said she : ' we saw and heard 
death. enough of this at Venice, though I never told 

Sh« continued to play till Annette brought you of it, ma'amselle. ' 
dinner into her chamber, at which Emily was ' Well, Annette, it was very prudent of you 
surprised, and inquired whose order she not to mention it then : be as prudent now ; 
obeyed. 'My lady's, ma'amselle,' replied the subject is an unpleasant one.' 
Annette: 'the signer ordered her dinner to 'Ah, dear ma'amselle! — to see now how 
be carried to her own apartment, and so she considei*ate you can be about some folks, who 
has sent you yours. There have been sad care so little about you ! I cannot bear to see 
doings between them, worse than ever, I you so deceived, and I must tell you. But it 
think.' is all for your own good, and not to spite my 

Emily, not appearing to notice what she lady, though, to speak truth, I have little 

said, sat down to the little table that was reason to love her ; but ' 

spread for her. But Annette was not to be ' You are not speaking thus of my aunt, I 
silenced thus easily. While she waited, she hope, Annette ?' said Emily gravely, 
told of the arrival of the men whom Emily ' Yes, ma'amselle, but I am though ; and If 
had observed on the ramparts, and expressed you knew as much as I do, you would not 
much surprise at their strange appearance, as look so angry. I have often and often heard 
well as at the manner in which they had been the signor and her talking over your marriage 
attended by Montoni's order. ' Do they dine with the count, and she always advised him 
with the signor, then ?' said Emily. never to give up to your foolish whims, as she 

• ' No, ma'amselle, they dined long ago in an was pleased to call them, but to be resolute, 
apartment at the north end of the castle : but and compel you to be obedient, whether you 
I know not when they are to go, for the signor would or not. And I am sure my heart has 
told old Carlo to see them provided with every ached a thousand times ; and I have thought, 
tiling necessary. They have been" walking all when she was so unhappy herself, she might 

about the castle, and asking questions of the have felt a little for other people, and * 

workmen on the ramparts. I never saw such ' I thank you for your pity, Annette,* said 
strange-looking men in my life, I am frightened Emily, interrupting her : ' but my aunt was 
whenever I see them.' unhappy then, and that disturbed her temper 

Emily inquired if she had heard of Count perhaps, or I think — I am sure — You may 
Morano, and whether he was hkely to recover : take away, Annette, I have done.' 
but Annette only knew that he was lodged in ' Dear ma'amselle, you have eat nothing at 
a cottage in the wood below, and that every- all ! Do try and take a little bit more. Dis- 
body said he must die. Emily's countenance turbed her temper truly ! why her temper is 
discovered her emotion. always disturbed, I think. And at Thoulouse 

' Dear ma'amselle, ' said Annette, ' to see I have heard my lady tallcing of you and 
how yoimg ladies will disguise themselves M. Valancourt to Madame Merveille and 
when they are in love ! I thought you hated Madame Vaison, often and often, in a very 
the count, or I am sure I would not have told ill-natured way, as I thought, telling them 
you ; and I am sure you have cause enough what a deal of trouble she had to keep you in 
to hate him.' order, and what a fatigue and distress it was 

' I hope I hate nobody,' replied Emily, to her, and that she believed you would run 
tn'ing to smile ; ' but certainly I do not love away with M. Valancourt, if she was not to 
Count Morano : I should be shocked to heir watch you closely ; and that you connived 
of any person dying by violent means. ' at his coming about the house at night, 

'Yes, ma'amselle, but it is his own fault.' and ' 

Emily looked displeased ; and Annette, ' Good God !' exglainied Enjily, blushing 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, t^ 

deeply, ' it is surely impossible my aunt could a momentary fear came over her as she looked 
thus have represented me 1' up the long rampart and saw no other persons. 

' Indeed, ma'am, I say nothing more While she hesitated, they approached. The 
than the truth, and not all of that. But I gate at the end of the terrace, whither thev 
thought, myself, she might have found some- were advancing, she knew was always locked, 
thing better to discourse about, than the and she could not depart by the opposite ex- 
faults of her own niece, even if you had been tremity without meeting them ; but before she 
in fault, ma'amselle ! but I did not believe a passed them, she hastily drew a thin veil over 
word of what she said. But my lady does not her face, which did indeed but ill conceal her 
care what she says against anybody, for that beauty. They looked earnestly at her, and 
matter.' spoke to each other in bad Italian, of which 

•However that may be, Annette,' inter- she caught only a few words ; but the fierce- 

rupted Emily recovering her composure, ' it ness of their countenances, now that she was 

docs not become you to speak of the faults near enough to discriminate them, struck her 

- of my aunt to me. 1 know you have meant yet more than the wild singularity of their air 

well, but say no more. — I have quite dined.' and dress had formerly done. It was the 

Annette blushed, looked down, and then countenance and figure of him who walked 
began slowly to clear the table. between the other two that chiefly seized her 

' Is this, then, the reward of my ingenuous- attention, which expressed a sullen haughti- 
ness?' said Emily, when she was alone ; ' the ness and a kind of dark watchful villany, and 
treatment I am to receive from a relation — an gave a thrill of horror to her heart. AJi this 
aunt — who ought to have been the guardian, was so legibly written on his features, as to be 
not the slanderer of my reputation, -who, as seen by a single glance ; for she passed the 
a woman, ought to have respected the group swiftly, and her timid eyes scarcely 
delicacy of female honour, and, as a rested on them a moment. Having reached 
relation, . should have protected mine ! But the terrace, she stopped, and perceived the 
to utter falsehoods on so nice a subject— to strangers standing in the shadow of one of 
repay the openness, and, I may say with the turrets, gazing after her, and seemingly, 
honest pride, the propriety of my conduct, by their action, in earnest conversation. She 
with slanders — required a depravity of heart immediately left the rampart, and retired to 
such as I could scarcely have believed existed, her apartment. 

such as I weep to find in a relation. O ! what In the evening, Montoni sat late, carousing 
a contrast does her character present to that with his guests in the cedar chamber. His 
of my beloved father ! while envy and low recent triumph over Count Morano, or» per- 
cunning form the chief traits of hers, his wf.s haps, some other circumstance, contributed to 
distinguished by benevolence and philosophic elevate his spirits to an unusual height He 
wisdom! But now let me only remember, if filled the goblet often, and gave a loose to 
possible, that she is unfortunate. ' merriment and talk. The gaiety of Cavigni, 

Emily threw her veil over her, and went on the contrary, was somewhat clouded by 
down to walk upon the ramparts, the only anxiety. He kept a watchful eye upon Verezz^ 
walk, indeed, which was open to her, though whom with the utmost difficulty he had 
she often wished that she might be permitted hitherto restrained from exasperating Montoni 
to ramble among the woods below, and still against Morano, by a mention of his lalte 
more, that she might sometimes explore the taunting words. 

sublime scenes of the surrounding country. One of the company exultingly recurred to 

But as Montoni would not suffer her to pass the event of the preceding evening. Verezzi's 

the gates of the castle, she tried to be con- eyes sparkled. The mention of Morano led 

tented with the romantic views she beheld to that of Emily, of whom they were all pro- 

from the walls. The peasants, who had been fuse in the praise, except Montoni, who sat 

employed on the fortifications, had left their silent, and then interrupted the subject. 

work, and the ramparts were silent and soli- When the servants had withdrawn, MontoUi 

tary. Their lonely appearance, together with and his friends entered into close conversation, 

the gloom of a lowering sky, assisted the which was sometimes checked by the irascible 

musings of her mind, and threw over it a kind temper of Verezzi, but in which Montoni dis- 

of melancholy tranquillity, such as she often played his conscious superiority, by that deci- 

loved to indulge. She turned to observe a sive look and manner which always accom- 

fine effect of the sun, as his rays, suddenly panied the vigom* of his thought, and to which 

streaming from behind a heavy cloud, lighted mostof his companions submitted, as to apower 

up the west towers of the castle, while the that they had no right to question, though of 

rest of the edifice was in deep shade, except each other's self-importance they were jealously 

that, through a lofty Gothic arch adjoining scrupulous. Amidst this conversation, one of 

the tower, which led to another terrace, the them imprudently introduced again the name 

beams darted in full splendour, and showed of Morano; and Verezzi, now more heated l)y 

the three strangers she had observed in the wine, disregarded the eiqjressive looks of 

morning. Perceiving them, she started, and Cavigni, and gave some dark hints of what 



138 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

had passed on the preceding night. These, ' since this castle came into my possession. I 

however, Montoni did not appear to under- inherit it by the female line. The lady, my 

stand, for he continued silent in his chair, predecessor was only distantly related to me ; 

without discovering any emotion, while the I am the last of her family. She was beauti- 

choler of Verezzi increasing with the apparent ful and rich : I wooed her ; but her heart 

insensibility of Montoni, he at length told the was fixed upon another, and she rejected me. 

suggestion of Morano, that this castle did It is probable, however, that she was herself 

not lawfully belong to him, and that he would rejected of the person, whoever he might be, 

not willingly leave another murder on his con- on whom she bestowed her favour, for a deep 

science. and settled melancholy took possession of her ; 

* Am I to be insulted at my own table, and and I have reason to believe she put a period 
by my own friends ?' said Montoni with a to her OAvn life. I was not at the castle at the 
coimtenance pale in anger. ' Why are the time ; but as there are some singular and 
words of that madman repeated to me?" Ve- mysterious circumstances attending that event, 
rezzi, who had expected to hearMontoni's in- I shall repeat them.' 

dignation poured forth against Morano, and ' Repeat them !' said a voice. ' 

answered by thanks to himself, looked with Montoni was silent ; the guests looked at 

astonishment at Cavigni, who enjoyed his each other, to know who spoke : but they per- 

confusion. ' Can you be weak enough to ceived that each was making the same inquiry, 

credit the assertions of a madman ?' rejoined Montoni at length recovering himself, ' We 

Montoni, 'or, what is the same thing, a man are overheard,' said he ; 'we will finish this 

possessed by the spirit of vengeance? But subject another time. Pass the goblet' 

he has succeeded too well ; you believe what The cavaliers looked round the wide cham- 

he said. ' ber. 

'Signor,' said Verezzi, 'we believe only 'Here is no person but ourselves,' said 

what we know.' — 'Howl' interrupted Mon- Verezzi: ' pray, signor, proceed.' 

toni sternly : ' produce your proof.' • Did you hear anything ?' said Montoni. 

* We believe only what we know,' repeated ' We did,' said Bertolini. 

Verezzi ; ' and we know nothing of what ' It could be only fancy,' said Vereza, look- 

Morano asserts.' Montoni seemed to recover ing round again. ' We see no person besides 

himself. 'I am hasty, my friends,' said he, ourselves ; and the sound I thought I heard 

' with respect to my honour ; no man shall seemed within the room. Pray, signor, go 

question it with impunity — you did not mean on. ' 

to question it. These foolish words are not Montoni paused a moment and then pro- 
worth your remembrance, or my resentment, ceeded in a lowered voice, while the cavaliers 
Verezzi, here is to your first exploit. ' drew nearer to attend. 

•Success to your first exploit,' re-echoed the 'Ye are to know, signers, that the Lady 

whole company. Laurentini had for some months shown S)rmp- 

* Noble Signor,' replied Verezzi, glad to toms of a dejected mind, nay, of a disturbed 
find he had escaped Montoni's resentment, imagination. Her mood was very unequal; 
• with my good-will, you shall build your ram- sometimes she was sunk in calm melancholy, 
parts of gold.' and at others, as I have been told, she be- 

' Pass the goblet,' cried Montoni. — ' We trayed all the s)'mptoms of frantic madness, 

well drink to Signora St. Aubert,' said Cavigni. It was one night in the month of October, 

— -• By your leave we will first drink to the after she had recovered from one of those fits 

lady of the castle,' said Bertolini.— Montoni of excess, and had sunk again into her usual 

was silent. • To the lady of the castle,' said melancholy, that she retired alone to her 

his.guests. He bowed his head. cliamber, and forbade all interruption. It 

T '.^^,"}"^^ surprises me, signor,' said Berto- was the chamber at the end of the corridor, 

hni, ' that you have so long neglected this signors, where we had the affray last night 

castle ; it is a noble edifice.' From that hour sh^was seen no more.' 

* It suits our purpose,' replied Montoni, • How ! seen no more !' said Bertolini • 
•and 2j a noble edifice. You know not, it 'was not her body found in the chamber ?' ' 
seems, by what mischance it came to me.' ' Were her remains never found?' cried the 

It was a lucky mischance, be it what it may, rest of the company all together, 

sjgnor, replied Bertolini smiling ; ' I would ' Never !' replied Montoni. 

Tu^rf ^^ ^^y ^^^ befallen me.' • What reasons were there to suppose she 

will o?t i ^°K*^^ gravely at him. ' If you destroyed herself, then?' said Bertolini. 

Shall h^!r*i, ^'^^'^} say. he resumed, ' you 'Aye. what reasons ?' said Verezzi. • How 

The ro„m ^^'''^- rr. happened it that her remains were never 

expressed .oi^?u?^ °^ Bertolini and Verezzi found? Although she killed herself, she could 

cSigS who^ ^'""f "V°'^ ^^^" curiosity ; not bury herself' 

ably heird the re^l^tf^^^K r ''°^^' ^^^ P^^^^" Montoni looked indignantly at Verezzi, who 

* It is nownifr ♦, °'^.^^^°''*'- , began to apologise. 

near twenty years, 'said Montoni, • Your p^doS. signer,' said he ; ' I did not 



I 

i 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



t^ 



eOfisidef that the lady was your relative when 
I spoke of her so lightly.' 

Montoni accepted the apology. 

' But the siguor will oblige us with the 
reasons which urged him to believe that the 
lady commited suicide. ' 



time after the departure of Emily, restless and 
miserable. Each morrow that approached he 
designed should carry him from thence ; yet 
to-morrow and to-morrow came, and still saw 
him lingering in the scene of his former hap- 
piness. He could not immediately tear him- 



' Those I will explain hereafter,' said Mon- self from the spot where he had been accus- 



toni ; • at present let me relate a most extra- 
ordinary circumstance. This conversation 
goes no further, signors. Listen, then, to 
what I am going to say. ' 
' Listen !' said a voice. 



tomed to converse with Emily, or from the 
objects they had viewed together, which ap- 
peared to him memorials of her affection, as 
well as a kind of surety for its faithfulness ; 
and next to the pain of bidding her adieu. 



They were all again silent, and the counten- was that of leaving the scenes which so power- 
ance of Montoni changed. fully awakened her image. Sometimes he had 

• This is no illusion of the fancy, ' said Cavigni, bribed a servant, who had been left in the care 



at length breaking the profound silence. 

'No,' said Bertolini ; 'I heard it myself, 
now. Yet here is no person in the room but 
ourselves !' 

•This is very extraordinary,' said Montoni, 
suddenly rising. ' This is not to be borne ; 
here is some deception, some trick ; I will 
know what it means.' 

All the company rose from their chairs in 
confusion. 

• It is very odd !' said Bertohni. ' Here is 



of Madame Montoni's chateau, to permit him 
to visit the gardens ; and there he would 
wander for hours together, wrapped in a 
melancholy not unplcasing. The terrace, and 
the pavilion at the end of it where he had 
taken leave of Emily on the eve of her depar- 
ture from Thoulouse, were his most favourite 
haunts. There, as he walked, or leaned from 
the window of the building, he would endea- 
vour to recollect all she had said on that 
night ; to catch the tones of her voice as they 



really no stranger in the room. If it is a trick, faintly vibrated on his memory ; and to re 

signor, you will do well to punish the author member the exact expression of her counten- 

of it severely.' ance, which sometimes came suddenly to his 

• A trick ! what else can it be !' said Cavigni, fancy like a vision ; that beautiful countenance, 
affecting a laugh. which awakened, as by instantaneous magic. 

The servants were now summoned, and the all the tenderness of his heart, and seemed to 
chamber was searched, but no person was tell, with irresistible eloquence — that he had 
found. The surprise and consternation of lost her forever ! At these moments his hurried 



the company increased. Montoni was dis 
composed. 

'We will leave this room,' said he, 'and 
the subject of our conversation also ; it is too 
solemn.' 

His guests were equally ready to quit the 
apartment ; but the subject had roused their 
curiosity, and they entreated Montoni to 
withdraw to another chamber and finish it : 
no entreaties could, however, prevail with 
him. Notwithstanding his efforts to appear 



steps would have discovered to a spectator 
the despair of his heart. The character of 
Montoni, such as he had received from hints, 
and such as his fears represented it, would 
rise to his view, together with all the dangers 
it seemed to threaten to Emily and to his 
love.^ He blamed himself that he had not 
urged these more forcibly to her while it might 
have been in his power to detain her, and that 
he had suffered an absurd and criminal deli- 
cacy, as he termed it, to conquer so soon the 



at ease, he was visibly and greatly disordered, reasonable arguments he had opposed to this 



Why, signer, you are not superstitious, 
cried Verezzi, jeeringly ; ' you, who have so 
often laughed at the credulity of others ? 

' I am not superstitious,' replied Montoni, 
regarding him with stem displeasure, ' though 



journey. Any evil that might have attended 
their marriage seemed so inferior to those 
which now threatened their love, or even to 
the sufferings that absence occasioned, that 
he wondered how he could have ceased to 



I kfiow how to despise the common-place urge his suit till he had convinced her of its 
sentences which are frequently uttered agai/ist propriety ; and he would certainly now have 
superstition. I will inquire further. into this followed her to Italy, if he could have been 



affair.' He then left the room; and his 
guests, separating for the night, retii^ed to 
their respective apartments. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

*He wears the rose of youth upon his cheek.* 

Shakespeare. 

We now return to Valancourt, who, it may 



spared from his regiment for so long a jour- 
ney. His regiment, indeed, soon reminded 
him that he had other duties to attend to than 
those of love. | 

A short time after his arrival at his brother's 
house, he was summoned to join his brother" 
officers, and he accompanied a battalion to 
Paris ; where a scene of novelty and gaiety 
opened upon him, such as till then he had 
only a faint idea of. But gaiety disgusted, 



be remembered, remained at Thoulouse some and company fatigued, his sick mind ; and h^ 



Jt4d THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

became an object of unceasing raillery to his panied them, were a spell upon the judgnlent 
companions, from whom, whenever he could of the auditors. H6r peiits soupers were the 
steal an opportunity, he escaped to think of most tasteful of any in Paris, and were fre- 
Emily. The scenes around him, however, quented by many of the second class of 
and the company with whom he was obliged HteratL She was fond of music, was herself 
to mingle, engaged his attention, though they a scientific performer, and had frequently con- 
failed to amuse his fancy, and thus gradually certs at her house Valancourt, who pas- 
weakened the habit of yielding to lamentation, slonately loved music, and who sometimes 
till it appeared less a duty to his love to in- assisted at these concerts, admired her execu- 
dulge it. Among his brother officers were tion, but remembered with a sigh the eloquent 
many who added to the ordinary character of simplicity of Emily's songs, and the natural 
a French soldier's gaiety, some of those fasci- expression of her manner, which waited not 
nating qualities which too frequently throw a to be approved by the judgment, but found 
veil over folly, and sometimes even soften the their way at once to the heart, 
features of vice into smiles. To these men Madame La Comtesse had often deep play 
the reserved and thoughtful manners of at her house, which she affected to restrain, 
Valancoiut were a kind of tacit censure on but secretly encouraged ; and it was wdl 
their own, for which they rallied him when known among her friends, that the splendour 
present, and plotted against him when absent ; of her establishment was chiefly supplied 
they gloried in the thought of reducing him from the profits of her tables. But her ptiiis 
to their own level, and considering it to be a soupers were the most charming imaginable I 
spirited frolic, determined to accomplish it. Here were all the delicacies of the four quar- 

Valancourt was a stranger to the gradual ters of the world, all the wit and the lighter 

progress of scheme and intrigue, against efforts of genius, all the graces of convecsa- 

which he could not be on his guard. He had tion — the smiles of beauty, and the charms of 

not been accustomed to receive ridicule, and music ; and Valancourt passed the pleasantest, 

he could ill endure its sting ; he resented it, as well as most dangerous, hours in these 

and this only drew upon him a louder laugh, parties. 

To escape from such scenes he fled into soli- His brother, who remained with his family 

tude, and there the image of Emily met him, in Gascoiiy, had contented himself with giv- 

and revived the pangs of love and despair, ing him letters of introduction to such of his 

He then sought to renew those tasteful studies relations residing at Paris as the kitter was 

which had been the delight of his early years ; not already known to. All these w^re persons 

but his mind had lost the tranquillity which is of some distinction ; and as neither the per- 

necessary for their enjoyment. To forget son, mind, nor manners of Valancourt the 

himself, and the grief and anxiety which the younger threatened to disgrace their alliance, 

idea of her recalled, he would quit his soli- they received him with ^as much kindness as 

tude, and again mingle in the crowd — ^glad of their nature, hardened by uninterrupted pros- 

a temporary relief, and rejoicing to snatch perity, would admit of : but their attentions 

amusement for the moment. did not extend to acts of real friendship ; for 

Thus passed weeks after weeks, time they were too much occupied by their own 

gradually softening his sorrow, and habit pursuits, to feel any interest in his ; and Uius 

strengthening his desire of amusement, till he was set down in the midst of Paris, in 

the scenes around him seemed to awaken the pride of youth, with an open unsuspicious 

into a new character, and Valancourt to have temper and ardent affections, without one 

fallen among them from the clouds. friend to warn him of the dangers to which 

His figiu-e and address made him a welcome he was exposed. Emily, who, had she been 

visitor wherever he had been introduced, and present, would have saved him from these 

he soon frequented the most gay and fashion- evils, by awakening his hoart, and engaging 

able circles of Paris. Among these was the him in worthy pursuits, now only increased 

assembly of the Countess Lacleur, a woman his danger : — it was to lose the grief which 

of eminent beauty and captivating manners, the remembrance of her occasioned, that he 

She had passed the spring of youth, but her first sought amusement ; and for this end he 

wit prolonged the triumph of its reign, and pursued it, till habit made it an object of ab- 

they mutually assisted the fame of each stract interest. 

other ; for those who were charmed by her There was also a Marchioness Champfort, 

loveliness, spoke with enthusiasm of her a young widow, at whose assemblies he passed 

talents ; and others, who admired her playful much of his time. She was handsome, still 

imagination, declared that her personal more artful, gay, and fond of intrigue. The 

graces were unrivalled. But her imt gination society which she drew round her was less 

was merely playful, and her wit, if such it elegant and more vicious than that of the 

CDuJd be called, was brilliant, rather than just ; Countess Lacleur ; but as she had address 

it dazzled, and its fallacy escaped the delec- ervow^b. lo throw a veil, though but a slight 

thn of the moment ; for the accents in wViVcYi oive, ovet ^^ Njot^x^^iwx q.\ \kRx ^^axacter, she 

sbe proaouaced it, and the smile that accom- v?as sxS^nSswr^ \yj twnq?} vsK«ii& <jS. ^\iax'^ 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, I4t 

called distinction. Valancourt was introduced to self to be, and to whose power she had so 

her parties by two of his brother officers, whose entirely committed herself ; and it would also 

late ridicule he had now forgiven so far, that have told her of what extreme importance to 

he could sometimes join in the laugh which a her future comfort it was, to reserve for her 

mention of his former manners would renew, self those possessions, which would enable hei 

The gaiety of the most splendid court in to live independently of Montoni should she 

Europe, the magnificence of the palaces, ever escape from his immediate control. But 

entertainments, and equipages, that sur- she was directed by a more decisive guide then 

rounded him — all conspired to dazzle his reason — the spirit of revenge, which urged her 

imagination and reanimate his spirits, and to oppose violence to violence, and obstinacy 

the example and maxims of his military asso- to obstinacy. 

dates to delude his mind. Emily's image, Wholly confined to the solitude of her 

indeed, still lived there ; but it was no longer apartment, she was now reduced to so- 

thc friend, the monitor, that saved him from licit the society she so lately rejected ; for 

himself, and to which he retired to weep the Emily was the only person, except Annette, 

sweet yet melancholy tears of tenderness, with whom she was permitted to converse. 

When he had recourse to it, it assumed a Generously anxious for her peace, Emily 

countewance of mild reproach, that wrung his therefore tried to persuade when she could 

soul, and called forth tears of unmixed not convince, and sought by every gentle 

misery ; his only escape from which was to means to induce her to forbear that asperity 

forget the object of it, and he endeavoured of reply which so greatly irritated Montoni. 

therefore to think of Emily as seldom as he The pride of her aunt did sometimes soften 

could. to the soothing voice of Emily, and thete 

Thus dangerously circumstanced was Valan- even were moments when she regarded her 

court, at the time when Emily was suffering affectionate attentions with good-will, 

at Venice from the persecuting addresses of The scenes of terrible contention to which 

Count Morano and the unjust authority of Emily was frequently compelled to be wit- 

Montoni ; at which period we leave him ness, exhausted her spirits more than any cir- 
cumstances that had occurred since her 

_^ departure from Thoulouse. The gentleness 

and goodness of her parents, together with 

n-uKvrr^'o vvTTT *^® scenes of her early happiness, often 

CHAPTER XXIII. stole on her mind, like the visions of a higher 

' The image of a wicked, heinous fault ^ world ; while the characters and circumstances 

Lives in his eye; that close aspect of his now passing beneath her eye excited both 

Does show the mood of a much-troubled breast. terror and surprise. She could scarcely have 

King John. imagined^ that passions so fierce and so 

Leaving the gay scenes of Paris, we return various, ^s thos6 which Montoni exhibited, 

to those of the gloomy Apennine, where could have been concentrated in one indi- 

Emily's thoughts were still faithful to Valan- vidual ; yet what more surprised her was, 

court. Loolang to him as to her only hope, that on great occasions he could bend these 

she recollected with jealous exactness every passions, wild as they were, to the cause of 

assurance and every proof she had witnessed his interest, and generally could disguise in his 

of his affection ; read again and again the countenance their operation on his mind ; but 

letters she had received from him ; weighed she had seen him too often, when he had 

with intense anxiety the force of every word thought it imnecessary to conceal his natiu*e, 

that spoke of his attachment ; and dried her to be deceived on such occasions, 
tears as she trusted in his truth. Her present life appeared like the dream of 

Montoni meanwhile had made strict in- a distempered imagination, or hke one of 

quiry concerning the strange circumstance of those frightful fictions in which the wild genius 

his alarm, without obtaining information ; and of the poets sometimes delighted. Reflection 

was at length obliged to account for it by brought only regret, and' anticipation terror, 

the reasonable supposition that it was a mis- How often did she wish to ' steal the lark's 

chevious trick played off by one of his wing, and mount the swiftest, gale,' that 

domestics. His disagreements with Madame Languedoc and repose might once more be 

Montoni on the subject of her settlements hers 1 

were now more frequent than ever ; he even Of Count Morano's health she made fre- 

confined her entirely to her own apartment, and quent inquiry; but Annette heard only vague 

did not scruple to threaten her with much greater aeports of his danger, and that his surgeon 

severity should she persevere in her refusal. had said he would never leave the cottage 

Reason, had she consulted it, would now alive ; while Emily could not but be shocked 

have perplexed her in the choice of a conduct to think that she, however innocently, might 

to be adopted. It would have pointed out be the means of his death ; and Annette, who 

the danger of irritating, by further opposi- did not fail to observe her emotion, interpre- 

tion, a man such as Montoni had proved him- ted it in her own way. 



Z43 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



But a circumstance soon occurred, which 
entirely withdrew Annette's attention from 
this subject, and awakened the surprise and 
curiosity so natural to her. Coming one day 
to Emily's apartment, with a countenance 
full of importance, ' What can all this mean, 
ma'amselle ?' said she. ' Would I was once 
safe in Languedoc again, they should never 
catch me going on my travels any more ! I 
must thiiSc it a fine thing, truly, to come 
abroad, and see foreign parts ! I little thought 
I was coming to be caged up in an old castle, 
among such dreary mountains, with tho chance 
of being murdered, or, wliat is as good, having 
my throat cut 1' 

'What can all this mean, indeed, Annette?' 
said Emily in astonishment. 

• Ay, ma'amselle, you may look surprised ; 
but you won't believe it, perhaps, till they 
have murdered you, too. You would not be- 
lieve about the ghost I told you of, though 
I showed you the very place where it used to 
appear ! — You will believe nothing, ma'am- 
selle.' 

• Not till you speak more reasonably, An- 
nette ; for Heaven's sake, explain your mean- 
ing. You spoke of murder !' 

' Ay, ma'amselle, they are coming to murder 
us all, perhaps ; but what signifies explaining? 
— ^you will not believe. ' 

Emily again desired her to relate what she 
had seen or heard. 

• O, I have seen enough, ma'am, and heard 
too much, as Ludovico can prove. Poorsoul 1 
they will murder him, too ! I little thought, 
when he sung those sweet verses under my 
lattice at Venice — ' Emily looked impatient 
and displeased — ' Well, ma'amselle, as I was 
saying, these preparations about the castle, 
and these strange-looking people that are call- 
ing here every day, and the signor's cruel 
usage of my lady, and his odd goings on — all 
these, as I told Ludovico, can bode no good. 
And he bid me hold my tongue. So, says I 
" The signor's strangely altered, Ludovico, in 
this gloomy castle, to what he was in France ; 
there, all so gay ! Nobody so gallant to 
my lady, then ; and he could smile, too, upon 
a poor servant sometimes, and jeer her, too, 
good-naturedly enough. I remember once, 
when he said to me as I was going out of 
my lady's dressingn-oom — ' Annette,' says 
he—" ' 

'Nevermind what the signor said,' inter- 
rupted Emily ; ' but tell me, at once, the 
circunistance which has thus alarmed you.' 

'Ay, ma'amselle,' rejoined Annette, 'that is 
just what Ludovico says;' says he, "Never 
mind what the signor says to you." — "So I 
told him what I thought about the signor. 
"He is so strangely altered," said I : "for now 
is so haughty, and so commanding, and so 
chary mi^ my lady ; and if he meets one, 
he'll scarcely look at one, unless it be to irown." 
' 'Somuch the better, " says Ludovico, ' ' somwcYx 



the better." And to tell you the truth, ma'am- 
selle, I thought this was a very ill-natured 
speech of Ludovico : but I went on. "And 
then," says I, "he is always knittii>g his brows; 
and if one speaks to him, he does not hear ; 
and then he sits up coimselling so, of a night, 
with other signors— there they are till long 
past midnight discoursing together !" ' 'Ah, but" 
says Ludovico, ' ' you don't know what they are 
counselling about." " No," said I, "but lean 
guess — it is about my young lady." Upon 
that, Ludovico burst out a-laughing quite 
loud ; so he put me in a huff, for I did not 
like that either I or you, ma'amselle, should 
be laughed at ; and I turned away quick, 
but he stopped me. " Don't be affronted, An- 
nette, " said he, ' ' but I cannot help laughing ;" i 
and with that he laughed again. "What I" 
says he, ' ' do you think that the signors sit up, 
night after night, only to counsel about thy 
young lady? No, no, there is something 
more in the wind than that. And these re- 
pairs about the castle, and these preparations 
about the ramparts — they are not making 
about young ladies. " " Why, surely, ' ' said I, 
' ' the signor, my master, is not going to make 
war ?" ' ' Make war I" said Ludovico, " what, 
upon the mountains and the woods ? for here 
is no living soul to make war upon, that I see." 
"What are 'these preparations for, then?" 
said I ; "why surely nobody is coming to take 
away my master's castle !" "Then there are 
so many ill-looking fellows coming to the 
castle every day," says Ludovico, without an- 
swering my question, ' ' and the signor sees 
them all, and .talks with them, and they 
all stay in the neighbourhood I By holy 
St. Marco! some of them are the most 
cut-throat looking dogs I ever set my eyes 
upon." 

' I asked Ludovico again, if he thought they 
were coming to take away my master's castle ; 
and he said, No, he did not think they 
were, but he did not know for certain. * ' Then, 
yesterday," said he, (but you must not tell this, 
ma'amselle) — "yesterday, a party of these 
men came, and left all their horses in the 
castle stables, where it seems they are to stay, 
for the signor ordered them all to be enter- 
tained with the best provender in the manger ; 
but the men are most of them in the neigh- 
bouring cottages. " 

' So, ma'amselle, I came to tell you all 
this, for I never heard anything so strange in 
my life. But what can these ill-looking men 
be come about, if it is not* to murder us? 
and the signor knows this, or why should he 
be so civil to them ? and why should he fortify 
the castle, and counsel so much with the other 
signors, and be so thoughtful ?' 

' Is this all you have to tell, Annette?' said 
Emily. ' Have you heard nothing else that 
alarms you ? ' 

• NoxVvva^ else, ma'amselle !' said Annette ; 
* N\Vi^ V?, ivQ\\>Qi\«v\Q.\x"^'? — ' C^\ft enough fof 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. >43 

my patience, Annette, but not quite enough she endeavoured to make her escape, but on 
to convince me we are all to be murdered, opening the doorwas very nearly falling over a 

though I acknowledge here is sufficient food person who lay on the floor without. She 

for curiosity. ' She forbore to speak her appre- screamed, and would have passed, but her 

hensions, because she would not encourage trembIingframerefusedtosupporther;andthc 

Annette's wild terrors ; but the present circum- moment in which she leaned against the wall of 

stances of the castle both surprised and the gallery allowed her leisure to observe the 

alarmed her. Annette, having told her tale, figure before her, and to recognise the features 

left the chamber, on the wing for new of Annette. Fear instantly yielded to sur- 

wonders. prise. She spoke in vain to the poor girl, 

. In the evening Emily had passed some who remained senseless on the floor, and 

melancholyhours with Madame Montoni, and then, losing all consciousness of her own 

was retiring to rest, when she was alarmed by weakness, hurried to her assistance, 
a strange and loud knocking at her chamber- When Annette recovered, she was helped 

door, and then a heavy weight fell against it, by Emily into the chamber, but was still 

that almost burst it open. She ^led to unable to speak, and looked round her as if 

know who was there, and receiving no answer, her eyes followed some person in the room, 

repeated the "call ; but a chilling silence fol- Emily tried to soothe her disturbed spirits, 

lowed. It occiured to her — for at this moment and forbore at present to ask her any questions ; 

she could not reason on the probability of but the faculty of speech was never long 

circumstances — that some one of the strangers withheld from Annette, and she explained in 

lately arrived at the castle had discovered her broken sentences, and in her tedious way, the 

apartment, and was come with such intent occasion of her disorder. She affirmed, and 

as their looks rendered too possible — to rob, with a solemnity of conviction that almost 

perhaps to murder her. The moment she staggered the incredulity of Emily, that she 

admitted this possibilitv, terror supplied the had seen an apparition as she was passing to 

place of conviction, and a kind of instinctive her bedroom through the corridor, 
remembrance of her remote situation from the * I hadheard strange stories of that chamber 

family heightened it to a degree that almost before,' said Annette ; ' but as it was so near 

overcame her senses. She looked at the door yoiurs, ma'amselle, I would not tell them to 

which led to the staircase, expecting to see it you, because they would frighten you. The 

open, and listening in fearful silence for a re- servants had told me often and oftett that it 

turn of the noise, till she began to think it had was haunted, and that was the reason why it 

proceeded from this door, and a wish of was shut up : nay, for that matter, why the 

escaping through the opposite one rushed whole string of these rooms here are shut up. 

upon her mind. She went to the gallery door, I quaked whenever I went by, and I must say 

and then fearing to open it, lest some person I did sometimes think I heard odd noises 

might be silently lurking for her without, she within it. But, as I said, as I was passing 

stopped, but with her eyes fixed in expecta- along the corridor, and not thinking a word 

tion upon the opposite door of the staircase, about the matter, or even of the strange 

As thus she stood, she heard a faint breathing voice that the signors heard the other night, 

near her, and became convinced that 5ome all of a sudden comes a great light, and, 

person was on the other . side of the door, looking behind me, there was a tall figure (I 

which was already locked. She sought for saw it as plainly, ma'amselle, as I see you at 

other fastening, but there was none. this moment), a tall figture gliding along (Oh, 

While she yet listened, the breathing was I cannot describe how !) inta the room that 

distinctly'heard, and her terror was not soothed is always shut up, and nobody has the key 

when, looking round her wide and lonely of it but the the signor, and the door shut 

chamber, she again considered her re- directly.' 

mote situation. As she stood hesitating ' Then it doubtless was the signor,' said 

whether to call for assistance, the continuance Emily. 

of the stillness surprised her ; and her spirits • O no, ma'amselle, it could not be him ; for 

would have revived had she not continued to I left him busy a-quarrelling in my lady's 

hear the faint breathing, that convinced her dressing-room I 

the person, whoever it was, had not quitted ' You bring me strange tales, Annette, 

the door. said Emily : it was but this morning that you 

At length, worn out with anxiety, she de- would have terrified me with the apprehension 

termined to call loudly for assistance from her of murder ; and now you would persuade me 

casement ; and was advancing to it, when, you have seen a ghost ! These -wonderful 

whether the terror of her mind gave her ideal stories come too quickly. ' 
sounds, or that real ones did come, she ' Nay, ma'amselle, I will say no more ;'Only 

thought footsteps were ascending the private if I had not been frightened I should not 

staircase ; and expecting to see its doors un- have fainted dead away so. I ran as fast as 

closed, she forgot all other cause of alarm, I could to get to yoiu: door ; but what was 

and re^fe^ted tQwards the corridor, Horf worst of sUl, I ooiNa^'Ow^N. v^^ <28!^\'^SiS2CsX 



>44 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



thonght something must be strangely the 
matter with me. and directly I dropt down.' 

' Was it the chamber where the black veil 
hrngs ?* said Emily. ' O no ! ma'amselle, it 
was one nearer to this. What shall I do to 
get to my room ? I would not go into the 
corridor again for the whole world ! Emily, 
whose spirits had been severely shocked, and 
who therefore did not like the thought of 
passing the night alone, told her she might 
sleep where she was. ' O ! no, ma'amselle,' 
rephed Annette, ' I would not sleep in the 
room now for a thousand sequins.' 

Wearied and disappointed, Emily first 
ridiculed, though she shared her fears, and 
then tried to soothe them ; birt neither attempt 
succeeded, and the girl persisted in believing 
and affirming that what she had seen was 
nothing human. It was not till some time 
after Emily had recovered her composure 
4hat she recolected the steps she had heard 
on the staircase — a remembrance, however, 
which made her insist that Annette should 
pass the night with her, and with much diffi- 
culty she at length prevailed, assisted by that 
part of the girl's fear which concerned the 
corridor. 

Early on the following morning, as Emily 
crossed the hall to the ramparts, she heard a 
noisy bustle in the courtyard, and the clatter 
of horses' hoofs. Such unusual sounds ex- 
cited her curiosity ; and instead of going to 
the ramparts she went to an upper casement, 
from whence she saw, in the court below, a 
large party of horsemen dressed in a singular 
but uniform habit, and completely, though 
variously armed. They wore a kind of short 
jacket composed of black and scarlet, and 
several of them had a cloak of plain black, 
which covering the person entirely hung down 
to 'the stirrups. As one of these cloaks glancd 
aside, slie saw beneath daggers, apparently of 
different sizes, tucked into the horseman's 
belt. She further observed that these were 
carried in the same manner by many of the 
horsemen without cloaks, most of whom bore 
also pikes or javelins. On their heads were 
the small Italian caps, some of which were 
distinguished by black feathers. Whether 
these caps gave a fierce air to the countenacc, 
or that the counlcnanccs they surmounted 
had naturally such an appearance, Emily 
thought she had never till then seen an 
assemblage of faces so savage and terrific. 
While she gazed, she almost fancied herself 
surrounded by banditti ; and a vague thought 
glanced athwart her fancy — that Montoni was 
the captain of the group before her, and that 
this castle was to be the place of rendezvous, 
hm ^^^^"Se and horrible supposition was 
^J; .'"^"^entary, though her reason could 
discoSl'12?® more probable, and though she 
hadfoSi '?'"°"? the band the strangers she 
vere nouf 2^ noticed with so much alarm, who 
"w dtotiugixished by the black plume. 



While she continued gazing. Cavigni, 
Verezzi, and Bertcdini, came forth from the 
hall habited like the rest, except that they 
wore hats with a mixed pltime of blade and 
scarlet, and that their arms dififered from 
those of the rest of the party. As tfaej 
mounted their horses, Emily was struck with 
the exulting joy expressed on the visage of 
Verezzi, while Cavigni was gay, yet with a 
shade of thought on his countenance ; and as 
he managed his horse with dexterity, his 
graceful and commanding figure, whi^ ex- 
hibited the majesty of a hero, ' had never 
appeared to more advantage. EmUy, as she 
observed him, thought he somewhat resembled 
Valancourt in the spirit and dignity of his 
person ; but she looked in vain for the noble, 
benevolent countenance — the soul's intelli- 
gence, which overspread the features of the 
latter. 

As she was hoping, she scarcely knew why, 
that Montoni would accompany &e party, he 
appeared at the hall door, but unaccoutred. 
Having carefully observed the horsemen, con- 
versed awhile with the cavaliers, and bidden 
them farewell, the band wheeled round the 
court, and, led by Verezzi, issuai forth imder 
the portcuUis ; Montoni following to the 
portal, and gazing after them for some time. 
Emily then retired from the casementt and 
now, certain of being unmolested, went to 
walk on the ramparts, from whence she soon 
after saw the party winding amongr the moim- 
tains to the west, appearing and disappearing 
between the woods, till distance confiis^ 
their figures, consolidated their numbers, and 
only a dingy mass appeared moving along the 
heights. 

Emily observed that no workmen were on 
the ramparts, and that the repairs of the forti- 
fications seemed to be completed. WHiile she 
sauntered thoughtfully on, she heard distant 
footsteps, and, raising her eyes, saw several 
men lurking under the castle walls, who were 
evidently not workmen, but looked as if tiiey 
would have accorded well with the party 
which was gone. Wondering where Annette 
had hid herself so long, who might have ex- 
plained some of the late circumstances, and 
then considering that Madame Montoni was 
probably risen, she went to her dressing-room, 
where she mentioned what had occurred ; but 
Madame Montoni either would not or could 
not give any explanation of the event. The 
signer's reserve to his wife on this subject was 
probably nothing more than usual ; yet to 
Emily it gave an air of mystery to the whole 
affair, that seemed to hint there was danger, 
if not villany, in his schemes. 

Anette presently came, and, as usual, was 
full of alarm ; to her lady's eager inquiries 
of what she had heard among the servants, 
she replied : 

' Ah, madam ! nobody knows what it is all 
about, but old Carlo ; he knows well enough, 



THE MYSTMRIES OF UDOLPHO, 



t43 



but I dare say h6 is as close as his master. 
Some say the signor is going out to frighten 
the enemy, as they call it : but where is the 
enemy ? Then others say, he is going to take 
away somebody's castle ; but I am sure he 
has room enough in his own, without taking 
other people's ; and I am sure I should like it 
a great deal better, if there were more people 
to fill it.' 

' Ah ! you will soon have your wish, I fear,' 
repUed Madame Montoni. 

' No, madam ; but such ill-looking fellows 
are not worth having. I mean such gallant, 
smart, merry fellows as Ludovico, who is 
always telling droll stories, to make one laugh. 
It was but yesterday, he told me such a 
humoursome tale ! I can't help laughing at it 
now, — Says he ' 

• Well, we can dispense with the story,' said 
her lady. 

• Ah i' continued Annette, ' he sees a great 
way further than other people ! Now he sees 
into all the signor's meaning, without knowing 
a word about the matter. ' 

• How is that ?' said Madame Montoni. 

• Why he says — but he made me promise 
not to tell, and I would not disoblige him for 
the world. ' 

' What is it he made you promise not to tell?' 
said her lady sternly. ' I insist upon know- 
ing immediately — ^what is it he made you 
promise ?* 

' O madam,' cried Annette, ' I Would not 
tell for the universe !' 

• I insist upon jrour telling this instant,' said 
Madame Montoni. 

' O dear madam ! I would not tell for a 
hundred sequins ! You would not have'me 
forswear myself, madam !' exclaimed Annette. 

" 1 will not wait another moment,'" said 
Madame Montoni. Annette was silent. 

'The signor shall be informed of this 
directly,' rejoined her mistress ; ' he will make 
you discover all. ' 

• It is Ludovico who has discovered,' said 
Annette : ' but for mercy's sake, madam, 
don't tell the signor, and you shall know all 
directly.' Madame Montoni said that she 
would not. 

' Well, then, madam, Ludovico says that 
the signor, my master is — is — that is, he only 
thinks so, and anybody, you know, madam, 
is free to think — that the signor, my master, is 
— is — ' 

' Is what ?' said her lady impatiently. 

• That the signor, my master, is going to be 
—a great robber — that is — he is going to rob 
on his own account ; — to be (but I am sure I 
don't understand what he means) — to be 
a captain of robbers.' 

'Art thou in thy senses, Annette?' said 
Madame Montoni ; *or is this a trick to deceive 
me. Tell me, this instant, what Ludovico 
did say to thee ; — no equivocation ; — this in- 
stant—' 



* Nay, madam,' cried Annette, Mf this is aU 
that I am to get ifor having told the secret — * 
Her mistress thus continued to insist, and An- 
nette to protest, till Montoni himself appeared, 
who bade the latter leave the room ; and she 
withdrew, trembling for the fate of her story. 
Emily also was retiring, but her aunt desired 
she would stay ; and Montoni had so often 
made her a witness of their contention, 
that he no longer had scruples on that account. 

' I insist upon knowing this instant, signor, 
what all this means,' said his wife — ' what are 
all these armed men, whom they tell me of, 
gone out about?' Montoni answered her 
only with a look of scorn ; and Emily whis- 
pering something to her, ' It does not signify,' 
said her aunt : • I will know ; and I will know, 
too, what the castle has been fortified for.' 

' Come, come,' said Montoni, ' other busi- 
ness brought me here. I must be trifled with 
no longer. I have immediate occasion for what 
I demand — those estates must be given up, 
without further contention ; or I may find a 
way ' 

'They never shall be given up.' inter- 
rupted Madame Montoni : ' they never shall 
enable you to carry on your wild schemes. : — 
but what are these ? I will know. Do you ex-- 
pect the castle to be attacked ? Do you expect 
enemies? Am I to be shut up here, to be- 
killed in a siege ?' 

' Sign the writing,' said Montoni, • and you 
shall know more.' 

'What enemy can be coming?' continued 
his wife. ' Have you entered into the service' 
of the state ? Am I to be blocked up here to die?' 

'That may possibly happen,' said Montoni, 
' unless you yield to my demand : for, come 
what may, you shall not quit the castle till 
then.' Madame Montoni burst into loud 
lamentation, which she suddenly checked, con- 
sidering that her husband's assertions might 
only be artifices employed to extort her con- • 
sent. She hinted this suspicion, and in the 
next moment told him also, that his designs 
were not so honourable as to serve the .state, 
and that she believed he had only commenced 
a captain of banditti, to join the enemies of 
Venice in plundering and laying waste the sur- 
rounding country. 

Montoni looked at her for a moment with a 
steady and stem countenance ; while Emily 
trembled ; and his wife, for once, thought she 
had said too much. ' You shall Ise removed 
this night,' said he, * to the east turret ; there, 
perhaps, you may understand the danger of 
offending a man whb has an unlimited power 
over you.' 

Emily now fell at his feet, and with tears of 
terror supplicated for her aunt, who sat tremb- 
ling with fear and indignation, now ready to 
pour forth execrations, and now to join the 
intercessions of Emily. Montoni, however, 
soon interrupted these entreaties with a ter- 
rible oath ; and as he biu-st from Emily, 



tAd THE MY^TBTilBS OP UDOLPHO. 

leavinpr his doalc in licr hand, she fell to the ' No, no, Annette, you are totally jniMaken ; 

floor, with a force that occasioned her a se- nothing extraordinary has happened.' 

vcre blow on the forehead. But he quitt^ the ' Why, extraordinary things happen here so 

room without attempting to raise her, whose often, ma'amselle, that there is nothing in 

attention was called from herself by a deep them. Here is another legion of Uiose 

groan from Madame Moutoni, who continued ill-looking fellows come to the castle this 

othen^ise unmoved in her chair, and had not morning.' 

fainted. Emily, hastening to her assistance, ' Hush, Annette, you will disturb my aunt ; 

sawhereyes rolling, and her features convulsed, we will talk of that by and by.' 

Ha\ing spoken to her v^ithout receiving an They continued watching silently, till Ma- 
answer, she brought water, and supported her dame Montoni uttered a low sigh, when Emily 
head while she held it to her lips ; but the in- took her hand, and spoke soothingly to her ; 
creasing couN-ulsions soon compelled Emily to but the former gazed with unconscious ^es, 
call for assistance. On her way through the and it was long before she knew her niece, 
hall, in search of Annette, she met Montoni, Her first words then inquired for Montoni ; Vo 
whom she told what had happened, and con- which Emily replied by an entreaty that she 
jured to return and comfort her aunt ; but he * would compose her spirits, and consent to be 
turned silently a^-ay with a look of indiffer- keptquiet, adding, 'that if she wished any mes- 
ence, and went out upon the ramparts. At sage to be conveyed to him, she would herself 
length she found old Carlo and Annette, and deliver it' ' No, 'said her aunt faintly, 'no — I 
they hastened to the dressing-room, where have nothing new to tell him. Does he per- 
Madame Montoni H^d fallen on the floor, and sist in saying I shall be removed from my 
was lying in strong convulsions. Having chamber?' 

lifted her into the adjoining room, and Emily replied that he had not spoken on the 

laid her on the bed, the force of her disorder subject since Madame Montoni heard him ; 

still made all their strength necessary to hold and then she tried to divert her attrition to 

her ; while Annette trembled and sobbed, and some other topic ; but her aunt seemed to be 

old Carlo looked silendy and piteously on, inattentive to what she said, and lost in 

as his feeble hands grasped those of his mis- secret thoughts. E>mily, having brought her 

tress, till turning his eyes on Emily, he ex- some refreshment, now left her to the care of 

daimed, ' Good God ! signora, what is the Annette, and went in search of Montoni, 

matter l* whom she found on a remote part oif the 

Emily looked calmly at him, and saw his rampart, conversing among a group of tiM 
inquiring eyes fixed on her ; and Annette, men described by Annette. They stood 
looking up, screamed loudly ; for Emily's face round with their fierce yet subjugated looks, 
was stained with blood, which continued to fall while he, speaking earnestly and pointing to 
slowly from her forehead; but her attention had the walls, did not percdve Emily, who re- 
been so entirely occupied by the scene before mained at some distance waiting till he should 
her that she had felt no pain from the wound, be at leisure, and observing involuntarily the 
She now held a handkerchief to her face, and, appearance of one man, more savage than 
notwithstanding her faintness, continued to his fellows, who stood resting on his pike and 
watch Madame Montoni, the violence of whose looking over the shoulders of a comrade at 
convulsions was abating, till at length they Montoni, to whom he listened with uncommon 
ceased, and left her in a kind of stupor. earnestness. This man was apparently of 

• My aunt must remain quiet,' said Emily, low condition ; yet his looks appeared not to 

' Go, good Carlo ; if we should want your acknowledge the superiority o5f Montoni, as 

assistance, I will send for you. In the mean- did those of his companions ; and sometimes 

time, if you have an opportunity, speak kindly they even assumed an air of authority, which 

of your mistress to your master. ' the decisive manner of the signor could not 

' Alas !' said Carlo, ' I have seen too much ! repress. Some few words of Montoni then 

I have little influence with the signor. But passed in the wind ; and as the men w^ere 

do, dear young lady, take some care of your- separating, she heard him say, ' This evening, 

self ; that is an ugly wound, and you look sadly. ' then, begin the watch at sun-set. ' 

' Thank you, my friend, for your considera- ' Atsun-set, signor, 'replied one or two of them, 

tion,' said Emily smiling kindly ; ' the wound and walked away; while Emily approached 

is trifling, it came by a fall.' Montoni, who appeared desirous of avoiding 

Carlo shook his head, and left the room ; her : but though she observed this, she had 

and Emily, with Annette, continued to watch courage to proceed. She endeavoured to 

by her aunt. • Did my lady tell the signor intercede once more for her aunt, represented 

what Ludovico said, ma'amselle ?' asked An- to him her sufferings, and urged the danger 

nette in a whisper ; but Emily quieted her of exposing her to a cold apartment in her 

fears on that subject. present state. ' She suffers by her own folly/ 

' I thought what this quarrelling would said Montoni, ' and is not to be pitied ; she 

come to/ continued Annette ; ' I suppose Uie knows how she may avoid these suflferings in 

signor has been beating my lady.' iMXvix^i— \\ ^^\^ \% temoved to the turret, it 



THR MYSTERIBS OP VDOLPHO. 



t\7 



^ni be hef own fault. Let her be obedient, 
and sign the writings you heard of, and I will 
think no more of it.' 

When Emily ventured still to plead, he 
sternly silenced and rebuked her for interfer- 
ing in his domestic affairs, but at length dis- 
missed her with this concession — That he 
would not remove Madame Montoni on the 
ensuing night, but allow her till the next to 
consider, whether she would resign her settle- 
ments, or be imprisoned in the east turret of 
the castle ; ' where she shall find,' he added, 'a 
punishment she may not expect.' 

Emily then hastened to inform her aunt of 
this short respite, and of the alternative that 
awaited her ; to which the latter made no 
reply, but appeared thoughtful, while Emily, 
in consideration of her extreme languor, 
wished to soothe her mind by leading it to 
less interesting topics : and though these 
efforts were unsuccessful, and Madame Mon- 
toni became peevish, her resolution on the 
contended point seemed somewhat to relax, 
and Emily recommended, as her only means 
of safety, that she should submit to Montoni's 
demand. 'You know not what you advise,' 
said her aunt. ' Do you understand that these 
estates will descend to you at ray death, if I 
persist in a refusal ?' 

'I was ignorant of that circumstance, 
madam,' replied Emily ; 'but the knowledge 
of it cannot withhold me from advising you to 
adopt the conduct, which not oply your peace, 
but I fear your safety requires ; and I entreat 
that you will not suffer a consideration com- 
paratively so trifling to make you hesitate a 
moment in resigning them. ' 

• Are you sincere, niece?' — ' Is it possible you 
can doubt it, madam ?' Her aunt appeared to 
be affected. ' You are not unworthy of these 
estates, niece, I would wish to keep them for 
your sake — you show a virtue I did not expect. ' 

' How have I deserved this reproof, madam ? ' 
said Emily sorrowfully. 

' Reproof 1 ' replied Madame Montoni : ' I 
meant to praise your virtue.' 

'Alas! here is no exertion of virtue,* re- 
joined Emily, 'for here is no temptation to 
be overcome.' 

' Yet Monsieur Valancourt — ' said her 
aunt. ' O madam l' interrupted Emily, antici- 
pating what she would have said, ' do not 
let nie glance on that subject ; do not 
let my mind be stained with a wish so 
shockingly self-interested. She immediately 
changed the topic, and continued with Madame 
Montoni till she withdrew to her apart- 
ment for the night. ' 

At that hour the castle was perfectly still, 
and every inhabitant of it, except herself, 
seemed to have retired to rest. As she passed 
along the wide and lonely galleries, dusky 
and silent, she felt forlorn and apprehensive 
of — she scarcely knew what ; but when enter- 
ing tlie corridor she recollected the incident of 



the preceding night, a dread seized her, lest 
a subject of alarm similar to that which had 
befallen Annette should occur to her, and 
which, whether real or ideal, would, she felt, 
have an almost equal effect upon her weakened 
spirits. The chamber to which Annette had 
alluded she did not exactly know, but under- 
stood it to be one of those she must pass in 
the way to her own ; and sending a fearful 
look forward into the gloom, she stepped 
lighdy and cautiously along, till coming to a 
door, from whence issued a low sound, she 
hesitated and paused ; and during the delay 
of that moment her fears so much increased, 
that she had no power to move from the spot 
Believing that she heard a human voice 
within, she was somewhat revived ; but in the 
next moment the door was opened, and a 
person whom she conceived to be Montoni 
appeared, who instantly started back and 
closed it, though not before she had seen by 
the light that burned in the chamber, another 
person sitting in a melancholy attitude by the 
fire. Her terror vanished, but her astonish- 
ment only began, which was now aroused by 
the mysterious secrecy of Montoni's manner, 
and by the discovery of a person whom he 
thus visited at midnight, in an apartment 
which had long been shut up, and of which 
such extraordinary reports were circulated. 

While she thus continued hesitating, strongly 
prompted to watch Montoni's motions, yet 
fearing to irritate him by appearing to notice 
them, the door was again opened cautiously, 
and as instantly closed as before. She then . 
stepped softly to her chamber, which was the 
next but one to this, but having put down her 
lamp, returned to an obscure comer of the 
corridor, to observe the proceedings of this 
half-seen person, and to ascertain whether it 
was indeed Montoni. 

Having waited in silent expectation for a 
few minutes, with her eyes fixed on the door, 
it was again opened, and the same person ap- 
peared, whom she now knew to be Montoni. 
He looked cautiously around, without per- 
ceiving her, then, stepping forward, closed the 
door and left the corridor. Soon after, Emily 
heard the door fastened on the inside, and she 
withdrew to her chamber, wondering at what 
she had witnessed. 

It was now twelve o'clock. As she closed 
her casement, she heard footsteps on the 
terrace below, and saw imperfectly through, 
the gloom several persons advancing, who- 
passed under the casement She then he^lrd . 
the clink of arms, and in the next moment the 
watch-word ; when recollecting the command . 
she had overheard from Montoni, aiid the 
hour of the night, she understood that these • 
men weoe for the first time relieving guard in 
the castle. Having listened till all was again 
still, she retired to sleep. 



X4d THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

CHAPTER XXIV. but suddenly considering that her liberty, 

•And shall no lay of death during this entertainment, though drcum- 

With pleasing murmur soothe scnbed, might favour her further plans, she 

Her parted soul ? acquiesced with seemmg reluctance, and Mon- 

Shall no tear wet her grave?' toni soon after left the apartment. His com- 

Sayer. inand struck Emily with surprise and appre- 

On the following morning Emily went early hcnsion, who shrunk from the thought of 

to the apartment of Madame M on toni, who being exposed to the gaze of strangers, such 

had slept well, and was much recovered. Her as her fancy represented these to be ; and the 

spirits also had returned witli her health, and words of Count Morano, now again recol- 

ber re^lution to oppose Montoni's demands lected, did not soothe her fears, 

revived, though it yet struggled with her fears, When she withdrew to prepare for dmner, 

which Emily, who trembled for the conse- she dressed herself with even more simplicity 

quence of further opposition, endeavoured to than usual, that she might escape observa- 

confirm. tion — a policy which did not avail her— for. 

Her aimt, as has been already shown, had as she repassed to her aunt's apartment she 

a disposition which delighted in contradiction, was met by Montoni, who censured what he 

and which taught her, when unpleasant cir- called her prudish appearance, and insisted 

cumstances were offered to her understanding, that she should wear the most splendid dress 

not to inquire into their truth, but to seek for she had, even that which had been prepared 

arguments by which she might make them for her intended nupti^s with Count Morano, 

appear £aLlse. Long habit had so entirely con- and which, it now appeared, her aunt had 

firmed this natural propensity, that she was carefully brought with her from Venice. This 

not conscious of possessing it. Emily's re- was made, not in the Venetian but in the 

monstrances and representations, therefore, Neapolitan fashion, so as to set off the shape 

roused her pride, instead of alarming, or and figure to the utmost advantage. In it, 

convincing her judgment, and she still relied her beautiful chesnut tresses-were negligently 

upon the discovery of some means by which bound up in pearls, and suffered to fall back 

she might yet avoid submitting to the demand again on her neck. The simplicity of a better 

of her husband. Considering that if she taste than Madame Montoni's was conspicu- 

could once escape from his castle, she might ous in this dress, splendid as it was, and 

defy his power, and, obtaining a decisive Emily's unaffected beauty never had appeared 

separation » live in comfort on the estates that more captivatingly. She had now only to 

yet remained for her, she mentioned this to hope that Montoni's order was prompted, not 

her niece, who accorded with her in the wish, by any extraordinary design, but by an osten- 

but differed from her as to the probability of tation of displaying his family, richly attired, 

its completion. She represented the impossi- to the eyes of strangers : yet nothing less 

bihty of passing the gates, secured and than his absolute command could have pre- 

guarded as they were, and the extreme danger vailed with her to wear a dress that had been 

of committing her design to the discretion of designed for such an offensive purpose, much 

a servant who might either purposely betray or less to have worn it on this occasion. As she 

accidentally disclose it. Montoni's vengeance descended to dinner, the emotion of her mind 

would also disdain restraint, if her intention threw a faint blush over her. countenance, and 

was detected : and though Emily wished, as heightened its interesting expression ; for 

fervently as she could do, to regain her free- timidity had made her linger in her apartment 

dom, and return to France, she consulted till the utmost moment, and when she entered 

only Madame Montoni's safety, and perse- the hall, in which a kind of state dinner was 

vered in advising her to relinquish her settle- spread, Montoni and his guests were already 

ment, without braving fiu*ther outrage. seated at the table. She was then going to 

The struggle of contrary emotions, how- place herself by her aunt : but Klontoni 

ever, continued to rage in her aunt's bosom, waved his hand, and two of the cavaliers rose, 

and she still brooded over the chance of effect- and seated her between them, 

ing an escape. While she thus sat, Montoni The eldest of these was a tall man, with 

entered the room, and, without noticing his strong Italian features, an aquiline nose, 

wife's indisposition, said that he came to and dark penetrating eyes, that flashed with 

remind her of the impolicy of trifling with him, fire when his mind was agitated, and even in 

and that he gave her only till the evening to its state of rest retained somewhat of the 

determine, whether she would consent to his wildncss of the passions. His visage was 

demand, or compel him, by a refusal, to remove long and narrow, and his complexion of a . 

her to the east turret. He- added, that a sickly yellow. 

party of cavaliers would dine with him that The other, who appeared to be about forty, 

day, and that he expected that she would sit had features of a different cast, yet Italian, 

at the head of the table, where Emily also and his look was slow, subtle, and penetrating ; 

must be present. Madame Montoni was ivov* \\\s e^e?., oi t^d-axV;. ^vey, were small and hollow ; 

on the point of uttering an absolute rciusJxV \ V\\s com^VivXQTi >«^^ ^ ^M\^\ixxv\. \kwcw^ and 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



149 



the contour of his face, though inclined to 
oval, was irregular and ill-formed. 

Eight other guests sat round the table, who 
were all dressed in a uniform, and had all an 
expression, more or less, of wild fierceness, 
of subtle design, or of licentious passions. 
As Emily timidly surveyed them, she remem- 
bered the scene of the preceding morning, 
and again almost fancied herself surrounded 
by banditti ; then, looking back to the tran- 
quillity of her early life, she felt scarcely less 
astonishment than grief at her present situa- 
tion. The scene in which they sat assisted 
the illusion : it was an ancient hall, gloomy 
from the style of its architecture, from its 
great extent, and because almost the only 
light it received was from one large gothic 
window, and from a pair of folding doors, 
which, being open, admitted likewise a view 
of the west rampart, with the wild mountains 
of the Apennine beyond. 

The middle compartment of this hall rose 
into a vaulted roof enriched with fret-work, 
and supported on three sides by pillars of 
marble ; beyond these, long colonnades re- 
tired in gloomy grandeur, till the extent was 
lost in twilight. The lightest footsteps of the 
servants, as they advanced through these, 
were returned in whispering echoes, and 
their figures, seen at a distance imperfectly 
through the dusk, frequently awakened 
Emily's imagination. She looked alternately 
at Montoni, at his guests, and on the sur- 
rounding scene ; and then, remembering her 
dear native province, her pleasant home, and 
the simphcity and goodness of the friends 
whom she had lost, grief and surprise again 
occupied her mind. 

When her thoughts could return from these 
considerations, she fancied she observed an 
air of authority towards his guests, such as 
she had never before seen him assume, 
though he had always been distinguished by 
a haughty carnage ; there was something 
also in the manners of the strangers, that 
seemed perfectly, though not servilely, to 
acknowledge his superiority. 

During dinner, the conversation was chiefly 
on war and poHtics. They talked with 
energy on the state of Venice, its dangers, 
the character of the reigning Doge, and of 
the chief senators ; and then spoke of the 
state of Rome. When the repast was over, 
tliey rose, and each filling his goblet with 
wine from the gilded ewer that stood beside 
him, drank, ' Success to our exploits 1' Mon- 
toni was lifting his goblet to his lips to 
drink this toast, when suddenly the wine 
hissed, rose to the brim, and, as he held the 
glass from him, it burst into a thousand 
pieces. 

To him who constantly used that sort of 
Venice glass, which had the quality of break- 
ing upon receiving poisoned liquor, a sus- 
picion that some of \iis guests had endeavoured 



to betray him instantly occurred, and he 
ordered all the gates to be closed, drew his 
sword, and, looking round on them, who 
stood in silent amazement, exclaimed, • Here 
is a traitor among us ; let those that are 
innocent assist in discovering the guilty.* 

Indignation flashed from the eyes of th* 
cavaliers, who all drew their swords ; and 
Madame Montoni, terrified at what might 
ensue, was hastening from the hall, when her 
husband commanded her to stay ; but his 
further words could not now be distinguished, 
for the voice of every person rose together. 
His order that all the servants should appear 
was at length obeyed, and they declared 
their ignorance of any deceit — a protestation 
which could not be believed ; for it was evi- 
dent that, as Montoni's liquor, and his only, 
had been poisoned, a deliberate design had 
been formed against his life, which could not 
have been carried so far towards its accom- 
phshment, without the connivance of the 
servant who had the care of the wine ewers. 

This man, with another, whose face be- 
trayed either the consciousness of guilt or the 
fear of punishment, Montoni ordered to be 
chained instantly, and confined in a strong 
room which had formerly been used as a 
prison. Thither Ukewise he would have .sent 
all his guests, had he not foreseen the conse- 
quence of so bold and unjustifiable a pro- 
ceeding. As to those, therefore, he con- 
tented himself with swearing that no man 
should pass the gates till this extraordinary 
affair had been investigated ; and then sternly 
bade his wife retire to her apartment, whither 
he suffered Emily to attend her. 

In about half an hour he followed to the 
dressing-room ; and Emily observed with 
horror his dark countenance and quivering lip, 
and heard him denounce vengeance on her aunt. 

' It will avail you nothing,' said he to his 
wife, ' to deny the fact ; I have proof of your 
guilt. Yoiu: only chance of mercy rests on a 
full confession ; — ^there is nothing to hope 
from sullenness, or falsehood ; your accom- 
plice has confessed all.' , 

Emily's fainting spirits were roused by 
astonishment, as she heard her aunt accused 
of a crime so atrocious, and she could not for 
a moment admit the possibility of her guilt. 
Meanwhile Madame Montoni's agitation did 
not permit her to reply ; alternately her com- 
plexion varied from livid paleness to a crimson 
flush ; and she trembled, — but whether with 
fear, or with indignation, it were difficult to 
decide. 

•Spare yom: words,* said Montoni, seeing 
her about to speak, ' your countenance makes 
full confession of your crime. — You shall be 
instantly removed to the east turret. * 

' This accusation,' said Madame Montoni, 
speaking with difficulty, ' is used only as a?x 
excuse for youi civi^VVj \ \ ^x^^-jcvw \.<:» \«^^ nr> 
it. You ^o ixo\. \i&'^\«^^ xaa ^ja^v^.^ 



I50 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

' Signer!' said Emily solemnly, ' this dread- vant, whose assistance they must solicit. Old 
ful charge, I would answer with my life, is Carlo was compassionate, but he seemed to be 
false. Nay, signor,' she added, observing too much in his master's interest to be trusted 
the severity of his countenance, ' this is no by them ; Annette could of herself do little, 
moment for restraint on my part ; I do not and Emily knew Ludovico only from her re- 
scruple to tell you that you are deceived, port. At present, however, these considera- 
most wickedly deceived, by the suggestion olF tions were useless, Madame Montoni and her 
some person who aims at the ruin of my niece being shut up from all intercourse, even 
aunt ; — it is impossible that you could your- with the persons whom there might be these 
self hiave imagined a crime so hideous. ' reasons to reject. 

Montoni, his Ups trembling more than In the hall, confusion and tumult still 

before, replied only, ' If you value your own reigned. Emily, as she listened anxiously to 

safety,' addressing Emily, 'you will be silent, the murmur that sounded along the gallery, 

I shall know how to interpret your remon- sometimes fancied she heard the clashing of 

stranccs should you persevere in them.' swords ; and when she considered the nature 

Emily raised her eyes calmly to heaven, of the provocation given by Montoni, and his 

• Here is, indeed, then, nothing to hope !' said impetuosity, it appeared probable that nothing 

she. less than arms would terminate the contention. 

' Peace !' cried Montoni, ' or you shall find Madame Montoni having exhausted all her 

there is something to fear.' expressions of indignation, and Emily hers of 

He turned to his wife, who had now comfort, they remained silent, in that kind of 

recovered her spirits, and who vehemently breathless stillness, which, in nature, often suc- 

and wildly remonstrated upon this nqysterious ceeds to the uproar of conflicting elements ; a 

suspicion; but Montoni's rage heightened stillness, like the morning that dawns upon tiie 

with her indignation ; and Emily, dreading ruins of an earthquake. 

the event of it, threw herself between them. An uncertain kind of terror pervaded Emily's 

and clasped his knees in silence, looking up mind ; the circumstances of the past hour 

in his face with an expression that might still came dimly and confusedly to her me- 

have softened the heart of a fiend. WHiether mory ; and her thoughts were various and 

his was hardened by a conviction of Madame rapid, though without tumult. 

Montoni's guilt, or that a bare suspicion of From this state of waking visions she xms 

it made him eager to exercise vengeance, he recalled by a knocking at the chamber-door, 

was totally and alike insensible to the distress and, inquiring who was there, heard the whis- 

of his wife, and to the pleading looks of pering voice of Annette. 

Emily, whom he made no attempt to raise, ' Dear madam, let me come in ; I have a 

but was vehemently menacing both, when he gieat deal to say," said the poor girl, 

was called out of tlie room by some person at ' The door is locked,' answered her lady. 

the door. As he shut the door, Emily heard 'Yes, ma'am, but cIo pray open it.' 

him turn the lock and take out the key ; so 'The signor has the key,' said Madame 

that Madame Montoni and herself were now Montoni. 

prisoners ; and she saw that his designs ' O blessed Virgin ! what will become of 

became more and more terrible. Her en- us ?' exclaimed Annette. 

deavours to explain his motives for this cir- 'Assist us to escape,' said her mistress. 

cumstance were almost as ineffectual as those ' Where is Ludovico?' 

to soothe the distress of iier aunt, whose ' Below in the hall, ma'am, amongst them 
innocence she could not doubt ; but she at all, fighting with the best of them !' 
length accounted for Montoni's readiness to 'Fighting! Who are fighting?' cried Ma- 
suspect his wife, by his own consciousness of dame Montoni. 

cruelty towards her, and for the sudden vio- ' Why the signor, nia'nm, and all the signers, 

lence of his present conduct against both, and a great many more. ' 

before even his suspicions could be completely ' Is any person much hurt ? * said 

formed, by his general eagerness to eftcct Emily in a tremulous voice. — • Hurt ! Yes, 

suddenly whatever he was led to desire, and ma'amselle, — there tlu;y lie bleeding, and the 

his carelessness of justice, or humanity, in swords are clashing, and— O holy saints ! Do 

accomplishing it. let me in, ma'am, they are coming- this way 

Madame Montoni, after some time, again I shall be murdered !' 

looked round in search of a possibility of es- ' Fly !' cried Emily, ' fly ! we cannot open 

cape from the castle, and conversed with the door.' 

Emily on the subject, who was now willing to Annette repeated that they were comincr, and 

encounter any hazard, though she forbore in the same moment fled. **' 

to encourage a hope in her aunt, which she 'Becalm, madam,' said Emily, turning- to 

herself did not admit. How strongly the her aunt, ' I entreat you to be calm ; I^ara 

edifice was secured, and how vigilantly not frightened, not frightened in the lejist do 

guarded, she knew too well ; and trembled to not you be alarmed.' 

commit their ^f^ty tg tUe capricg p5 l\\e set- '\o\x<i^Tv^';'a\^Oc^ -s^x-^^ckxt Yourself,' replied 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. t$t 

her aunt ; ' Mercifnl God ! what is it they guished voices and steps approaching, 
mean to do witli us?' She then rose to go ; but the sounds came 

' They come, perhaps, to liberate us,' said along the only passage by which she could 
Emily ; ' Jbignor Montoni perhaps is— is con- depart, and she was compelled to await in the 
quered. ' hall the arrival of the persons whose steps she 

The belief of his death gave her spirits a neard. As these advanced, she distinguished 
sudden shock, and she grew faint as she saw groans, and then saw a man borne slowly 
him, in imagination, expiring at her feet. along by foiu" others. Her spirits faltered at 

• They are coming !' cried Madame Mon- the sight, and she leaned against the wall for 
toni — ' I hear their steps — they are at the door.' support. The bearers meanwhile entered the 
Emily turned her languid eyes to the door, hall, and being too busily occupied to detain, 
but terror deprived her of utterance. The or even notice Emily, she attempted to leave 
key sounded in the lock ; the door opened, it ; but her strength failed, and she again sat 
and Montoni appeared, followed by three down on the bench. A damp dullness came 
ruffian-like men. 'Execute your orders,' said over her ; her sight became confused ; she 
he, turning to them, and pointing to his wife, knew not what had passed, or where she was, 
who shrieked, but was immediately carried yet the groans of the wounded person still 
from the room ; while Emily sunk senseless vibrated on her heart. In a few moments the 
on a couch, by which she had endeavoured to tide of life seemed again to flow ; she began 
support herself. When she recovered, she to breathe more freely, and her senses 
was alone, and recollected only that Madame revived. She had not fainted, nor had ever 
Montoni had been there, together with some totally lost her consciousness, but had con- 
anconnected particulars of the preceding trived to support herself on the bench ; still 
transaction, which were, however, sufficient to without courage to turn her eyes upon the 
renew all her terror. She looked wildly unfortunate object which remained near her, 
round the apartment, as if in search of some and about whom the men were yet too much 
means of intelligence concerning her aunt, engaged to attend her. 

while neither her own danger, nor an idea of es- When her strength returned, she rose, and 

caping from the room, mimediately occurred, was suffiired to leave the hall, though her 

When her recollection was more complete, anxiety, having produced some vain inquiries 

,she raised herself and went, but with only a concerning Madame Montoni, had thus made 

faint hope, to examine whether the door was a discovery of herself. Towards her chamber 

unfastened. It was so, and she then stepped she now hastened as fast as her steps would 

timidly out into the gallery, but paused there, bear her ; for she still perceived, upon her 

uncertain which way she should proceed. Her passage, the sounds of confusion at a dis- 

first wish was to gather some information as tance, and she endeavoured, by taking her 

to her aunt, and she at length turned her steps way through some obscure rooms, to avoid 

to go to the lesser hall, where Annette and the encountering the persons whose looks had 

other servants usually waited. terrified her before, as well as those parts of 

Everywhere, as she passed, she heard, from the castle where the tumult might still 

a distance, the uproar of contention, and the rage. 

figures and faces which she met, hurrying At length she reached her chamber, and, 
along the passages, struck her mind with dis- having secured the door of the corridor, felt 
may. Emily might now have appeared like herselif for a" moment in safety. A profound 
an angel of light encompassed by fiends. At stillness reigned in this remote apartment, 
length she reached the lesser haJl, which was which not even the faint miumiu* of the most 
silent and deserted, but, panting for breath, distant sounds now reached. She sat down 
she sat down to recover herself The total near one of the casements ; and as she gazed 
stillness of this place was as awful as the tu- on the mountain- view beyond, the deep re- 
mult from which she had escaped ; but she pose of its beauty struck her with all the 
had now time to recall her scattered thoughts, force of contrast, and she could scairely 
to remember her personal danger ; and to believe herself so near a scene of savage dis- 
cunsidcr of some means of safety. She per- cord. The contending elements seemed to 
ccivcd that it was useless to seek Madame have retired from their natural spheres,* and 
Montoni, through the wide extent and intrica- to have collected themselves into the mind 
cies of the castle, now too, when every avenue of men, for there alone the tempest now 
seemed to be beset with ruffians ; in this hall reigned. 

she could not resolve to stay^ for she knew Emily tried to tranquillize her spirits.;'] 
not how soon it might become their place of but anxiety made her constantly listen for' 
rendezvous ; and though she wished to go to some sound, and often look out upon the . 
her chamber, she dreaded again to encounter ramparts, where all, however, was lonely" 
them on the way. and still. As a sense of her ovm immediate 

Thus she sat, trembling and hesitating, danger had decreased, her apprehension con- 
when a distant murmur broke on the silence, cerning Madame Montoni heightened, who, 
and grew louder and louder, till she distin- she remembered, had b^Q».^'5x^€s>j^iK3L^ass»R.^ 



ts^ 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



with confinement in the east turret, and it was 
possible that her husband had satisfied his 
vengeance with this punishment. She therefore 
determined, when night should return, and 
the inhabitants of the castle should be asleep, 
to explore the way to the turret, which, as the 
direction it stood in was mentioned, appeared 
not very difficult to be done. She knew 
indeed that, although her aunt might be 
there, she could afford her no assistance, but 
it might give her some comfort even to know 
that she was discovered, and to hear the 
sound of her niece's voice : for herself, any 
certainty concerning Madame Montoni's fate, 
appeared more tolerable than this exhausting 
suspense. 

Meanwhile Annette did not appear, and 
Emily was surprised, and somewhat alarmed 
for her, whom in the confusion of the late 
scene, various accidents might have befallen , 
and it was improbable that she would have 
failed to come to her apartment, luiless some- 
thing unfortunate had happened. 

Thus the hours passed in solitude, in silence, 
and in anxious conjecturing. Being not once 
distiurbed by a message or a sound, it appeared 
that Montoni had wholly forgotten her, and it 
gave her some comfort to find that she could 
be so unnoticed. She endeavoured to with- 
draw her thoughts from the anxiety that 
preyed upon them, but they refused control ; 
she could neither read nor draw, and the tones 
of her lute were so utterly discordant with the 
present state of her feelings, that she could 
not endure them for a moment. 

The sun at length set behind the western 
mountains ; his fiery beams faded from the 
clouds, and then a dun melancholy purple 
drew over them, and gradually involved the 
features of the country below. Soon after, 
the sentinels passed on the rampart to com- 
mence the watch. 

Twilight had now spread its gloom over 
every object ; the dismal obscurity of her 
chamber recalled fearful thoughts : but she re- 
membered that, to procure a light, she must 
pass through a great extent of the castle, and 
above all, through the halls where she had 
already experienced so much horror. Dark- 
ness indeed in the present state of her spirits 
made silence and solitude terrible to her ; it 
would also prevent the possibility of her find- 
ing her way to the turret, and condemn her to 
remain in suspense concerning the fate of her 
aunt ; yet she dared not to venture forth for 
a lamp. 

Continuing at the casement, that she might 
catch the last lingering gleam of evening, a 
thousand vague images of fear floated on her 
fancy. ' What if some of these rufi&ans,' said 
she, ' should find out the private staircase, 
and in the darkness of night steal into my 
chamber !' Then recollecting the mysterious 
inhabitant of the neighbouring apartment, her 
terror changed its object. ' He is not a pri- 



soner,' said she, ' though he remaihs in ono 
cliamlDcr, for Montoni did not fasten the door 
when he left it ; the unknown person himself 
did this ; it is certain, therefore, he can come 
out when he pleases.' 

She paused ; for notwithstanding the terrors 
of darkness, slie considered it to be very im- 
probable, wlioever he was, that he could have 
any interest in intruding upon her retirement ; 
and again the' subject of her emotion changed, 
when, remembering her nearness to the cham- 
ber where the veil had formerly disclosed a 
dreadful spectacle, she doubted whether some 
passage might not communicate between it 
and the insecure door of the staircase. 

It was now entirely dark, and she left the 
casement. As she sat with her eyes fixed on 
the hearth, she thought she perceived a spark 
of light ; it twinkled and disappeared, and 
then again was visible. At length, with much 
care, she fanned the embers of a wood fire, 
that had been lighted in the morning, into 
flame, and, having communicated it to a lamp 
which always stood in her room, felt a satis- 
faction not to be conceived without a review ot 
her situation. Her^first care was to guard the 
door of the staircase, for which purpose she 
placed against it all the furniture she could 
move, and she was thus employed for some 
time, at the end of which she had another in- 
stance how much more oppressive misforttme 
is to the idle than to the busy ; for, having 
then leisure to think over all the circumstances 
of her present afflictions, she imagined a thou- 
sand evils for futurity, and these real and ideal 
subjects of distress alike wounded her mind. 

Thus heavily moved the hours till midnight, 
when she counted the sullen notes of the great 
clock as they rolled along the rampart un- 
mingled with any sound except the distant 
foot-fall of a sentinel who came to relieve guard. 
She now thoi^ht she might venture towards 
the turret, and having gently opened the cham- 
ber door to examine the corridor, and to listen if 
any person was stirring in the castle, found all 
around in perfect stillness. Yet no sooner had 
she left the room than she perceived a light 
flash on the walls of the corridor, and without 
waiting to see by whom it was carried, she 
shrunk back and closed her door. No one 
approaching, she conjectured that it was Mon- 
toni going to pay his midnight visit to her 
unknown neighbour, and she determined to 
wait till he should have retired to his own 
apartment. 

When the chimes had tolled another half- 
hour, she once more opened the door ; and 
Eerceiving that no person was in the corridor, 
astily crossed into a passage that led ^ong 
the south side of the castle towards the stair- 
case, whence she believed she could easily find 
her way to the turret. Often pausing on her 
way, listening apprehensively to the murmurs 
of the wind, and looking fearfully onward into 
the gloom of the long passages, she at length 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



«53 



peached the staircase ; but there her perplexity dressing-room door to-day, I went I scarcely 

began. Two passages appeared, of which knew where for safety ; and in this gallery 

she knew not how to prefer one, and was com- here, 1 met Ludovico, who hurried me into 

pelled at last to decide by chance rather than this chamber, and locked me up to keep me 

by circumstances. That she entered opened out of harm, as he said. But he was in such 

first into a wide gallery, along which she a hurry himself he hardly spoke ten words ; 



passed lightly and swiftly ; for the lonely as- 
pect of the place awed her, and she started at 
the echo of her own steps. 

On a sudden, she thought she heard a 
voice, and not distinguishing from whence 
it came, feared equally to proceed or to return. 
For some moments she stood in an attitude 
of listening expectation, shrinking almost 
from herself, and scarcely daring to look 
round her. The voice came again : but though 
it was now near -her, terror did not allow 
her to judge exactly whence it proceeded. 
She thought, however, that it was the voice 
of complaint, and her belief was soon con- 
firmed by a low moaning sound, that seemed 
to proceed from one of the chambers opening 



but he told me he would come and let me 
out when all was quiet, and he took away 
the key with him. Now all these hours have 
passed, and I have neither seen nor heard a 
word of him ; they have miurdered him — I 
know they have !' 

Emily suddenly remembered the wounded 
person whom she had seen borne into the 
servants' hall, and she scarcely doubted that he 
was Ludovico ; but she concealed the circum- 
stance from Annette, and endeavoured to com- 
fort her. Then, impatient to learn some- 
thing of her aunt, she again inquired the way 
to the turret. 

' O ! you are not going, ma'amselle,' said 
Annette : ' for Heaven's sake, do not go and 



into the gallery. It instantly occurred to her leave me here by myself I' 

that Madame Montoni might be there con- ' Nay, Annette, you do not think I can wait 

fined, and she advanced to the door to speak, in the gallery all night, 'replied Emily. * Direct 

but was checked by considering that she was me to the turret ; in the morning I will en- 

I>erhaps going to commit herself to a stranger, deavour to release you.' 

who might discover her to Montoni; for 'O holy Mary 1' exclaimed Annette, *am I 

though this person, whoever it was, seemed to to stay here by myself all night ! I shall be 

be in affliction, it did not follow that he was frightened out of my senses, and I shall die 



a pnsoner. 

While these thoughts passed over her mind, 
and left her still in hesitation, the voice spoke 
again, and calling Ludovico, she then per- 
ceived it to be that of Annette ; on which, no 
longer hesitating, she went in joy to answer 
her. 

' Ludovico !' cried Annette, sobbing — 
' Ludovico !' 

' It is I,' said Emily, trying to open the 
door. ' How came you here ? Who shut 
you up ?' 



of hunger ; I have had nothing to eat since 
dinner !' 

Emily could scarcely forbear smiling at the 
heterogeneous distresses of Annette, though 
she sincerely pitied them, and said what she 
could to soothe her. At length she obtained 
something like a direction to the east turret, 
and quitted the door, from whence, after 
n>any intricacies and perplexities, she reached 
the steep and winding stairs of the turret, at 
the foot of which she stopped to rest, and to 
reanimate her courage with a sense of her 



* Ludovico !' repeated Annette — ' O, Ludo- duty. As she surveyed this dismal place she 



vico !' 

• It is not Ludovico, it is* I — Mademoiselle 
Emily. ' 

Annette ceased sobbing, and was silent. 
' If you can open the door, let me in,' said 
Emily]; 'here is no person to hurt you.' 

• Ludovico ! — O, Ludovico !' cried Annette. 
Emily now lost her patience ; and the fear 

of being overheard increasing, she was even 



perceived a door on the opposite side of the 
staircase, and anxious to know whether it 
would lead her to Madame Montoni, she tried 
to undraw the bolts which fastened it. A fresher 
air came to her face, as she unclosed the 
door, which opened upon the east rarripart, 
and the sudden cturent had nearly extinguished 
her light, which she now removed to a dis- 
tance ; and again looking out upon the obscure 



nearly about to leave the door, when she con- terrace, she perceived only the faint outline of 

sidered that Annette might possibly know the walls and of some towers, while above, 

something of the situation of Madame Mon- heavy clouds borne along the wind seemed to 

toni, or direct her to the turret. At length mingle with the stars and wrap the night in 

she obtained a reply, though little satisfac- thicker darkness. As she gazed, now willing 

tory, to her questions ; for Annette knew to defer the moment of certainty, from which 

nothing of Madame Montoni, and only con- she expected only confirmation of evil, a 

jured Emily to tell her what was become of distant footstep reminded her that she might 

Ludovico. Qf him she had iio information be observed by the men on watch ; and hastily 



to give, and she again asked who had shut 
Annette up. 

'Ludovico,' said the poor 
shut me up. When I ran 



girl, 'Ludovico 
away from the 



closing the door, she took her lamp, and 
passed up the staircase. Trembling came 
upon her as she ascended through the gloom. 
To her melancholY Caivc^ xXi\s» ^R.^KNS^N.^^^aR.'^ 



X54 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



place of death, and the chilling silence that 
reigned confirmed its character. Her spirits 
faltered. ' Perhaps,* said she, • I am come 
hither only to learn a dreadful truth, or to 
witness some horrible spectacle ; 1 feel that 
my senses would not survive such an addition 
of horror.' 

The image of her aunt murdered — ^mur- 
dered, perhaps, by the hand of Montoni, rose 
to her mind ; she trembled, gasped for breath 
— ^repented that she had dared to venture 
hither, and checked hcr.steps. But after she 
had paused a few minutes, the consciousness 
of her duty returned as she went on. Still all 
was silent. At length a track of blood upon 
a stair caught her eye ; and instantly she per- 
ceived that the wall and several other steps 
were stained. She paused, again struggletl 
to support herself, and the lamp almost fell 
from her trembling hand. Still no sound was 
heard, no living being seemed to inhabit the 
turret : a thousand times she wished herself 
again in her chamber ; dreaded to inquire 
further — dreaded to encounter some horrible 
spectacle — and yet could not resolve, now 
that she was so near the termination of her 
efforts, to desist from them. Having again 
collected courage to proceed, after ascending 
about half way up the turret she came to 
another door ; but here again she stopped m 
hesitation, listened for sounds within, and 
then summoning all her resolution, unclosed 
it, and ent^ed a chamber, which, as her lamp 
shot its feeble rays through the darkness, 
seemed to exhibit only dew-stained and 
deserted walls. As she stood examining it, 
in fearful expectation of discovering the re- 
mains of her unfortunate aunt, she perceived 
something lying in an obscure corner of the 
room, and struck with a horrible conviction, 
she became for an instant motionless and 
nearly insensible. Then with a kind of des- 
perate resolution she hurried towards the ob- 
ject that excited her terror, when, perceiving 
the clothes of some person on the floor, she 
caught hold of them, and found in her grasp 
the old uniform of a soldier, beneath which 
appeared a beap of pikes and other arms. 
Scarcely daring to trust her sight, she con- 
tinued for some moments to gaze on the ob- 
ject of her late alarm ; and then left the 
chamber, so much comforted and occupied by 
the conviction that her aunt was not there, that 
she was going to descend the turret without 
inquiring further ; when, on turning to do so, 
she observed upon some steps on the second 
flight an appearance of blood ; and remem- 
bering that there was yet another chamber to 
be explored, she again followed the windings 
of the ascent. Still, as she ascended, the 
track of blood glared upon the stairs. 

It led her to the door of a landing-place 
that terminated them, but she was unable to 
follow it further. Now that she was so near 
the sougbt-for certainty, she dreaded lo ktvov.- 



it even more than before, and had not forti- 
tude sufficient to speak, or to attempt open- 
ing the door. 

Having listened in vain for some sound 
that might confirm or destroy her fears, she 
at length laid her hand on the lock, and find- 
ing it fastened, called on Madame Montoni ; 
but only a chilling silence ensued. 

' She is dead ! ' she cried, — * murdered ! 
her blood is on the stairs ! * 

Emily grew very faint ; could support her- 
self no longer ; and had scarcely presence of 
mind to set down the lamp, and pUice herself 
on a step. 

When her recollection returned, she spoke 
again at the door, and again attemptal to 
open it ; and having lingered for some time 
without receiving any answer, or hearing 
any sound, she descended the turret, and, 
with all the swiftness her feebleness would 
permit, sought her own apartmenL 

As she turned into the corridor, the door 
of a chamber opened, from whence Montoni 
came forth ; but Emily, more terrified than 
ever to behold him, shrunk back into the 
passage soon enough to escape being noticed, 
and heard him close the door, which she had 
perceived was the same she formerly observed. 
Having here listened to his departing steps 
till their faint sound wras lost in distance, 
she ventured to her apartment, and, securingit, 
once again retired to her bed, leaving the lamp 
burning on the hearth. But sleep was fled 
from her harassed mind, to which images of 
horror alone occurred. She endeavoured to 
think it possible that Madame Montoni had 
not been taken to the turret ; but when she 
recollected the former menaces of her hus- 
band, and the terrible spirit of vengeance 
which he had displayed on a late occasion ; 
when she remembered his general character, 
the looks of the men who had forced Madame 
Montoni from her apartment, and tlie written 
traces on the stairs of the turret — she could 
not doubt that her aunt had been carried 
thither, and could scarcely hope that she had 
not been carried to be murdered. 

The gray of morning had long dawned 
through her casements before Emily closed 
her eyes in sleep ; when wearied nature at 
length yielded her a respite from suflfering. 



CHAPTER XXV. 
'Who rears the bloody hand V 



Saver. 



Emily remained in her chamber on the 
following morning, without any notice from 
Montoni, or seeing a human being, except the 
armed men who sometimes passed on the 
terrace below. Having tasted no food since 
U\c dinner of the preceding day, extreme 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



TtSS 



faintness made her feel the necessity of quit- 
ting the asylum of her apartment to obtain 
refreshment, and she was also very anxious 
to procure liberty for Annette. Willing, how- 
ever, to defer venturing forth as long as pos- 
sible, and considering whether she should 
apply to Montoni or to the compassion of 
some other person, her excessive anxiety con- 
cerning her aunt at length overcame her 
abhorrence of his presence, and she deter- 
mined to go to him, and to entreat that he 
would suffer her to see Madame Montoni. 

Meanwhile it was too certain, from the 
absence of Annette, that some accident had 
befallen Ludovico, and that she was still in 
confinement : Emily therefore resolved also 
to visit the chamber where she had spoken to 
her on the preceding night, and, if the poor 
girl was yet there, to inform Montoni of her 
situation. 

It was near noon before she ventured from 
her apartment, and went first to the south 
gallery, whither she passed without meeting a 
single person or hearing a sound, except now 
and then the echo of a distant footstep. 

It was unnecessary to call Annette, whose 
lamentations were audible upon the first ap- 
proach to the gallery, and who, bewailing her 
own and Ludovico's fate, told Emily that she 
should certainly l^e starved to death if she 
was not let out immediately. Emily replied 
that she was going to beg her release of 
Montoni: but the terrors. of hunger now 

gelded to those of the signor ; and when 
mily left her, she was loudly entreating that 
her place of refuge might be concealed from 
him. 

As Emily drew near the great hall, the 
sounds she heard and the people she met in 
the passages renewed her alarm. The latter, 
however, were peaceable, and did not inter- 
rupt her, though they looked earnestly at her 
as she passed, [and sometimes spoke. On 
crossing the hall towards the cedar room, 
were Montoni usually sat, she perceived on 
the pavement fragments erf swords, some 
tattered garments stained with blood, and 
almost expected to have seen among them a 
dead body ; but from such a spectacle she 
was at present spared. As she approached 
the room, the sound of {several voices issued 
from within ; and a dread of appearing be- 
fore many strangers, as well as of irritating 
Montoni by such an intrusion, made her 

{)ause and falter from her purpose. She 
ooked up through the long arcades of 
the hall, in search of a servant who might 
bear a message ; but no one appeared, and 
the urgency of what she had to request made 
her still linger near the door. The voices 
within were not in contention, though she 
distinguished those of several of the guests 
of the preceding day ; but still her resolution 
failed whenever she would have tapped at the 
door, and she had determined to walk in the 



haU till some person should appear who 
might call Montoni from the room ; when, as 
she turned from the door, it was suddenly 
opened by himself. Emily trembled and 
was confused, while he almost started with 
surprise, and all the terrors of his counten- 
ance unfolded themselves. She forgot all she 
would have said, and neither inquired for her 
aunt, nor entreated for Annette, but stood 
silent and embarrassed. 

After closing the door, he reproved her 
for a meanness of which she had not been 
guilty, and sternly questioned her what she 
had overheard ; an accusation which revived 
her rdboUection so far, that she assuped him 
she had not come thither with an intention to 
listen to his conversation, but to entreat his 
compassion for her aunt and for Annette. 
Montoni seemed to doubt this assertion, for 
he regarded her with a scrutinizing look ; and 
the doubt evidently arose from no trifling 
interest. Emily then further explained herselu 
and concluded with entreating him to inform 
her where her aunt was placed, and to permit 
that she might visit her ; but he looked upon 
her only with a malignant smile, which instan- 
taneously confirmed her worst fears for her 
aunt, and at that moment she had not courage 
to renew her entreaties. 

^' For Annette,' said he — ' if you go to 
Carlo, he will release the girl ; the foolish 
fellow who shut her up, died yesterday.' 

Emily shuddered ' But my aunt, signor/ 

said she. ' O tell me of my aunt !' 

' She is taken care of,' replied Montoni 
hastily ; ' I have no time to answer idle 
questions. ' 

He would have passed on ; but Emily, in 
a voice of agony that could not be wholly 
resisted, conjured him to tell her where 
Madame Montoni was ; while he paused, 
and she anxiously watched his countenance, 
a trumpet sounded, and in the next moment 
she heard the heavy gates of the portal open, 
and then the clattering of horses' hoofs in 
the court, with the confusion of many voices. 
She stood for a moment hesitating whether 
she should follow Montoni, who at the sound 
of the trumpet had passed through the hall ; 
and .turning her eyes whence it came, she saw, 
through the door that opened beyond a long 
perspective of arches into the courts, a party 
of horsemen, whom she judged, as well as the 
distance and her embarrassment would allow, 
to be the same she had seen depart a few 
days before. But she staid not to scrutinize } 
for when the trumpet soimded again, the 
chevaliers rushed out of the cedar room, and 
men came running into the hall from every 
quarter of the castle. Emily once laon 
hurried for shelter to her own apartment- 
Thither she was still pursued by images of 
horror. She reconsidered Montoni's manner 
and words when he had spoken of his wife, 
and they served only to con&im. Vv^e^c \fis:k^. 



136 



THE, MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



icrril )lc su«;pic:ons. Tears refused any longer 
to relieve her distress ; and she had sat for a 
considerable time absorlrcd in thought, when 
a knocking at the chamber door roused her, 
on opening which she found old Carlo. 

' Dear young lady,' said he, ' 1 have been 
so flurried, 1 never once thought of you till 
just now : I have brought you some fruit and 
wine, and I am sure you must stand in need 
of them by this time.' 

'Thank you, Carlo,' said Emily; 'this is 
very good of you. Did the signer remind you 
of me?* 

' Xo, signora,' replied Carlo, ' his Excel- 
IfKza has business enough on his hands.' 
Emily then renewed her inquiries concerning 
Madame Monloni ; but Carlo had been 
employed at the other end of the castle 
during the time that she was removed, and 
he had heard nothing since concerning her. 

While he spoke, Emily looked steadily at 
him ; for she scarcely knew whether he was 
really ignorant, or concealed his knowledge of 
the truth from a fear of offending his master. 
To several questions concerning the con- 
tentions of yesterday he gave very limited 
answers ; but told that the disputes were now 
amicably sculcd, and that the signor believed 
himself to have been mistaken in his suspicions 
of his guests. ' The fighting was about that, 
signora,' said Carlo; 'but I trust I shall 
never see such another day in this castle, 
though strange things are about to be done. * 

On her inquiring his meaning, ' Ah, sig- 
nora !' added he, ' it is not for me to betray 
secrets, or tell all I think, but time will 
tell.' 

She then desired him to release Annette ; 
and having described the chamber in which 
the poor girl was confined, he promised to 
obey her immediately, and was departing, 
when she remembered to ask who were the 
J)ersons just arrived. Her late conjecture was 
right ; it was Verezzi, with his party. 

Her spirits were somewhat soothed by this 
short conversation with Carlo ; for in her 
present circumstances it afforded some com- 
fort to hear the accents of compassion and to 
meet the look of sympathy. 

An hour passed before Annette appeared, 
who then came weeping and sobbing : • O 
Ludovico, Ludovico 1 cried she. 

' My poor Annette !' said Emily, and made 
her sit down. 

' Who could have foreseen this, ma'am- 
Selle ? O miserable wretched day — that ever 
I should live to see it I' and she continued to 
moan and lament till Emily thought it neces- 
sary to check her excess of grief. ' \Ve are 
continually losing dear friends by death,' said 
she with a sigh that came from her heart. 
*We must submit to the \s\\\ of Heaven — 
Our tears, alas ! cannot recall the dead V 
Annette took the handkerchief from her 




' You will meet Lndovieo in a better world, 
I hope,' added Emily. 

'Yes — yes — ^ma'amselle,' sobbed Annette; 
' but I hope I shall meet him again in this~- 
though he is so wounded 1' 

' Wounded 1' exclaimed Emily ; * does he 
live?* 

' Yes, ma'am, but^-^mt he has a terril 
wound, and could not come to let me 01 
They thought him dead at first, and he 
not been rightly himself till within this hour." 

* Well, Annette, I rejoice to hear he lives.' 

' Lives ! Holy Saints ! why he wiU not die, 
surely 1' 

Emily said she hoped not ; but this expres- 
sion of hope Annette thought implied fear, 
and her own increased in proportion as Emily 
endeavoiucd to encourage her. Tq inquiries 
concerning Madame Montoni she could give 
no satisfactory answers. 

' I quite forgot to ask among the servants,' 
ma'amsclle,' said she, 'for I could think of 
nobody but poor Ludovico.' 

Annette's grief was now somewhat assuaged, 
and Emily sent her to make inquiries con- 
cerning her lady, of whom, however, she 
could obtain no intelligence, some of the 
people she spoke with being really iniorant of 
her fate, and others having probal^ received 
orders to conceal it. 

This day passed with Emily in continued 
grief and anxiety for her aunt ; but she was 
unmolested by a;iy notice from Montoni ; and 
now that Annette was liberated, she obtained 
food without exposing herself to danger or 
impertinence. 

Two following days passed in the same 
manner, unmarked by any occurrence, during 
which she obtained no information of Madame 
Montoni. On the evening of the second, 
having dismissed Annette and retired to bed, 
her mind became haunted by the most dismal 
images, such as her long anxiety concerning 
her aunt suggested ; and unable to forgtt 
herself for a moment, or to vanquish the 
phantoms that tormented her, she rose from 
her bed, and went to one of the casements of 
her chamber to breathe a freer air. 

Ail without was silent and dark, unless that 
could be called light which was only the faint 
glimmer of the stars, showing imperfectly the 
outline of the mountains, the western towers 
of the castle, and the ramparts below where a 
solitary sentinel was pacing. What an image 
of repose did this scene present I The fiace 
and terrible passions, too, which so often 8^- 
tated the inhabitants of this editioe, seemed 
now hushed in sleep ; — those mysterious 
workings that rouse the elements of man's 
nature into tempest— were calm. Emily's 
heart was not so ; but her sufferings, 
though deep, jxirtook of the gentle character 
of lior mind. Hers was a silent anguish, 
weeping yet enduring ; not the wild energy of 
-^o^sLou, inflaming imagination, bearing down 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPIW. 



15; 



the barriers of reason, and living in a world 
of its own. 

The air refreshed her, and she continued at 
the casement looking on the shadowy scene, 
over which the planets burned with a clear 
light, amid the deep blue ether, as they silently 
moved in their destined course. She remem- 
bered how often she had gazed on them with 
her dear father, how often he had pointed out 
their way in the heavens, and explained their 
laws : and these reflections led to others, which 
in an almost equal degree awakened her grief 
and astonishment. 

They brought a retrospect of all the strange 
and mournful events which had occurred since 
she lived in peace with her parents. And to 
Emily, who had been so tenderly educated, so 
tenderly loved, who once knew only goodness 
and happiness — to her, the late events and her 
present situation — in a foreign land — in a re- 
mote castle — surrounded by vice and violence, 
seemed more like the visions of a distempered* 
imagination, than the circumstances of truth. 
She wept to think of what her parents would 
have suffered, could they have foreseen the 
events of her future life. 

While she raised her streaming eyes to 
heaven, she observed the same planet which 
she had seen in Languedoc, on the night pre- 
ceding her father's death, rise above the 
eastern towers of the castle, while she re- 
membered the conversation which had passed 
concerning the probable state of departed 
souls ; remembered also the solemn music 
she had heard, and to which the tenderness 
of her spirit had, in spite of her reason, given 
a superstitious meaning. At these recollec- 
tions she wept again, and continued musing ; 
when suddenly the notes of sweet music passed 
on the air. A superstitious dread stole over 
her ; she stood listening for some moments in 
trembling expectation, and then endeavoured 
to re-collect her thoughts, and to reason herself 
into composure : but human reason cannot 
establish her laws on subjects lost in the ob- 
scurity of imagination, any more than the eye 
can ascertain the form of objects that only 
glimmer through the dimness of night. 

Her surprise on hearing such soothing and 
delicious sounds, was at least justifiable ; for 
it was long, very long, since she had listened 
to anything like m«lody. The fierce trumpet 
and the shrill fife were the only instruments 
she had heard since her arrival at Udblpho. 

When her mind was somewhat more com- 
posed, she tried to ascertain from what quarter 
the sounds proceeded, and thought they came 
from below ; but whether from a room of the 



castle, or from the terrace, she could not with 
certainty judge. Fear and surprise now 
yielded to the enchantment of a strain that 
floated on the silent night with the most soft 
and melancholy sweetness. Suddenly it 
seemed removed to a distance, trembled 
faintly, and then entirely ceased. 

She continued to listen, sunk in that pleas- 
ing repose which soft music leaves on the 
mind — but it came no more. Upon this 
strange circumstance her thoughts were long 
engaged ; for strange it certainly was to hear 
music at midnight, when every inhabitant of 
the castle had long since retired to rest, and 
in a place where nothing like harmony had 
been heard before, probably for many years. 
Long suffering had made her spirits peculiarly 
sensible to terror, and hable to be affected by 
the illusions of superstition. — It now seemed to 
her as if her dead father had spoken to her in 
that strain, to inspire her with comfort and 
confidence on the subject which had then oc- 
cupied her mind. Yet reason told her that 
this was a wild conjecture, and she was in- 
clined to dismiss it ; but, with the inconsistency 
so natural when imagination guides the 
thoughts, she then vv^vered towards a belief 
as wild. She remembered the singular event 
connected with the castle, which had given it 
into the possession of its present owner ; and 
when she considered the mysterious manner 
in which its late possessor had disappeared, 
and that she had never since been heard of, 
her mind was impressed with a high degree of 
solemn awe ; so that, though there appeared 
no clue to connect that event with the late 
music, she was inclined fancifully to think they 
had some relation to each other. At this con- 
jecture, a sudden chillness ran through her 
frame ; she looked fearfully upon the duski> 
ness of her chamber, and the dead silence that 
prevailed there heightened to her fancy its 
gloomy aspect. 

At length she left the casement ; but her 
steps faltered as she approached the bed, and 
she stopped and looked round. The single 
lamp that burned in her spacious chamber was 
expiring ; for a moment she shrunk from the 
darkness bejMond ; and then, ashamed of the 
weakness, which, however, she could not 
wholly conquer, went forward to the bed, 
where her mind did not soon know the sooth- 
ings of sleep. She still mused on the late oc- 
currence, and looked with anxiety to the next 
night, when at the same hour she determined 
to watch whether the music returned. 'If 
those sounds were human,' said she, ' I shall 
probably hear them again.* 



END OF PART I. 



BILLING AND SONS, PRINTERS, GUILDFORD, SURRSYv 



THE 



MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO 



A ROMANCE 



BY 



ANN RADCLIFFE 

Al THOR OF "the ROMANCE OF THE FOREST" AND " THE ITALIAN 



^ ^ 



LONDON AND NEW YORK 

GEORGE ROUT LEDGE AND SONS 

1877 



CAP^TAIN MARRYAT'S NOVELS. 

In fancy covers, iniiform with this Vol inn e. 

Peter Simple. 

The King's Own. 

The Poacher. 

The Phantom Ship. 

Mr. Midshipman Easy, 

Monsieur Violet. 

Jacob Faithful. 

Valerie. 

Newton Forster. 

Japhet in Search of a Father. 

Frank* Mildmay. 

Rattlin the Reefer. 

Percival Keene. 

The Dog Fiend. 

The Pacha of Many Tales. 

OLkA PODRIDA. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

' Then, oh, you blessed ministers above. 
Keep me in patilhce ; and, in ripen'd time. 
Unfold the evil which is here wrapt up 
In countenance.' 

Shakspeare. 

Annette came almost breathless to Emily's 
apartment in the morning. ' O ma'amselle 1' 
said she in broken sentences, 'what news I 
have to tell 1 1 have found out who the prisoner 
is — ^but he was no prisoner neither ; — he that 
was shut up in the chamber I told you of. I 
must think him a ghost forsooth !' 

•Who was the prisoner?' inquired Emily, 
while her thoughts glanced back to the circum- 
stance of the preceding night. 

'You mjstsike, ma'am,' said Annette; 'he 
was not a prisoner, after all.' 

* Who is the person, then?' 

* Holy saints 1' rejoined Annette ; * how I 
was surprised ; I met him just now, on the 
rampart below there. I never was so sur- 
prised in my life ! Ah ! ma'amselle ! this is 
a strange place ! I should never have done 
wondering, if I was to live here a hundred 
years. But, as I was saying, I met him just 
now on the rampart, and I was thinking of 
nobody less than of him. ' 

' This trifling is insupportable,' said Emily; 
•pr'ythee, Annette, do not torture my patience 
any longer. ' 

' Nay, ma'amselle, guess — ^guess who it 
was ; it was somebody you know very well.' 

* I cannot guess,' said Emily impatiently. 

' Nay, ma'amselle, I'll tell you something 
to guess by — ^A tall signor, with a longish 
face, who walks so stately, and used to wear 
such a high feather in his hat ; and used often 
to look down upon the ground when people 
spoke to him ; and to look at people from 
imder his eyebrows, as it were, all so dark 
and frowning. You have seen him often and 
often at Venice, ma'am. Then he was so 
intimate with the signor, too. And, now I 
think of it, I wonder what he could be afraid 
of in this lonely old castle, that he shut him- 
self up for. But he is come abroad now, for 
I met him on the rampart just this minute. 



I trembled when I saw him, for I always was 
afraid of him, somehow ; but I determined I 
would not let him see it ; so I went up to 
him, and made him a low curtsy : " You are 
welcome to the castle, Signor Orsini," said I.' 

' O, it was Signor Orsini, then 1' said Emily. 

'Yes, ma'amselle, Signor Orsini himself, 
who caused that Venetian gentleman to be 
killed, and has been popping about from place 
to place ever since, as I hear.' 

' Good God !' exclaimed Emily, recovering 
from the shock of this intelligence ; 'and is he 
come to Udolpho ? He does well to endea- 
vour to conceal himself.' 

' Yes, ma'amselle ; bmt if that was all, this 
desolate place would conceal him, without his 
shutting nimself up in one room. Who would 
think of coming to look for him here ? I am 
sure I should as soon think of going to look 
for anybody in the world. ' 

• There is some truth in that,' said Emil^, 
who would now have concluded it was Orsim's 
music which she had heard on the preced- 
ing night, had she not known that he had 
neither taste nor skill in the art. But though 
she was unwilling to add to the number of 
Annette's surprises, by mentioning the subject 
of her own, she inquired whether any per- 
son in the castle played on a musical instru- 
ment. 

' O yes, ma'amselle ; there is Benedetto 
plays the great drum to admiration ; and then, 
there is Launcelot the trumpeter ; nay, for 
that matter, Ludovico himself can play on 
the trumpet ; — ^but he is ill now. I remember 
once ' 

Emily interrupted her ; * Have you heard 
no other music since you came to the castle ? 
— none last night?' 

' Why, did you hear any last night, ma'am- 
selle?' 

Emily evaded this question by repeating 
her own. 

' Why, no, ma'am,' replied Annette : ' I 
never heard any music here, I must say, but 
the drums and the trumpet ; and as for last 
night, I did nothing but dream I saw my late 
lady's ghost. ' 



tllE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



' Your iafe lady's,' said Emily in a tremu- 
lous voice : ' you have heard more, then ! 
Tell me — tell me all, Annette, I entreat ; tell 
me the worst at once. ' 

'Nay, nia'amsclle — you know the worst 
already. ' 

' I know nothing,' said Emily. 

' Yes, you do, ma'amselle : you know that 
nobody knows anything about her ; and it is 

{)lain, therefore, she is gone the way of the first 
ady of the castle — ^nobody ever knew anything 
about her.' 

Emily leaned her head upon her hand, and 
was for some time silent : then, telling Annette 
she wished to be alone, the latter left the 
room. 

The remark of Annette had revived Emily's 
terrible suspicion concerning the fate of 
Madame Montoni ; and she resolved to make 
another effort to obtain certainty on this sub- 
ject, by applying to Montoni once more. 

When Annette returned, a few hours after, 
she told Emily that the porter of the castle 
wished very much to speak with her, for that 
he had something of importance to say : her 
spirits had, however, of late been so subject to 
alarm, that any new circumstance excited it ; 
and this message from the porter, when her 
first siuprise was over, made her look round 
for some lurking danger — the more sus- 
piciously, perhaps, because she had frequently 
remarked the unpleasant air and countenance 
of this man. She now hesitated whether to 
speak with him, doubting, even, that this 
request was only a pretext to draw her into 
some danger : but a little reflection showed 
her the improbability of this ; and she blushed 
at her weak fears. 

' I will spealc to him, Annette,' said she : 
' desire him to come to the corridor imme- 
diately.' 

Annette departed, and soon after returned. 

•Bamardine, ma'amselle,' said she, 'dare 
not come to the corridor, lest he should be 
discovered, it is so far from his post ; and he 
dare not even leave the gates for a moment 
now : but if you will come to him at the portal, 
through some roundabout passages he told 
me of, without crossing the courts, he has 
that to tell which will surprise you : but you 
must not come through the courts, lest the 
signor should see you. ' 

Emily, neither approving these roundabout 
passages nor the other part of the request, 
now positively refused to go. 'Tell him,' 
said she, ' if he has anything of consequence 
to impart, I will hear him in the corridor, 
whenever he has an opportunity of coming 
thither. ' 

Annette went to deliver this message, and 
was absent a considerable time. When she 
^®^^ed— 'It won't do, ma'amseUe,' said 
ihf ' • ^"^^rdine has been considering, all 

^« as his place is worth to leave his post 



now ; but if you will come to the east rani- 
part in the dusk of the evening, he can, per- 
haps, steal away, and tell you all he has to 
say.' 

Emily was surprised and alarmed at the 
secrecy which this man seemed to think so 
necessary, and hesitated whether to meet him 
— till, considering that he might mean to 
warn her of some serious danger, she resolved 
to go. . 

' Soon after sunset,' said she, ' I will be 
at the end of the east rampart But then 
the watch will be set,' she added recollecting 
herself ; ' and how can Bamardine pass un- 
observed ?' 

• That is just what I said to him, ma'am : 
and he answered me, that he had the key of 
the gate at the end of the rampart, that leads 
towards the courts, and could let himself 
through that way ; and a9 for the sentinels, 
there were none at this end of the terrace, 
because the place is guarded enough by the 
high walls of the castle and the east turr^ : 
and he said, those at the other end were too 
far off to see him, if it was pretty duskyish.' 

' Well,' said Emily, ' I must hear what he 
has to tell ; and therefore desire you will go 
with me to the terrace this evening.' 

'He desired it might be pretty duskyish, 
ma'amselle,' repeated Annette, ' because of 
the watch. ' 

Emily paused ; and then said she would be 
on the terrace an hour after sunset ; — 'and tell 
Barnardine,' she added, * to be punctual to 
the time ; for that I, also, may be observed by 
Signor Montoni. — Where is the signor? I 
would speak with him. ' 

' He is in the cedar chamber, ma'am, coun- 
selling with the other signors. He is going to 
give them a sort of treat to-day, to make up 
for what passed at the last, I suppose ; the 
people are all very busy in the kitchen.' 

Emily now inquired if Montoni expect^ 
any new guests ; and Annette believed that he 
did not. ' Poor Ludovico !' added she : ' he 
would be as merry as the best of them, if he 
was well. But he may recover yet : Count ■ . 
Morano was wounded as bad as he, and he is 
got well again, and is gone back to Venice.' J 

• Is he so ?' said Emily ; * when did you 
hear this?' 

'I heard it last night, ma'amselle; but I 
forgot to tell it.* 

Emily asked some further questions ; and 
then, desiring Annette would observe, and 
inform her when Montoni was alone, the 
girl went to deliver her messag^e to Bar- 
nardine. 

Montoni was however so much engaged 
during the whole day, that Emily had no 
opportunity of seeking a release from her 
terrible suspense concerning- her aiuit An- 
nette was employed in watching his* steps. 
and m attending upon Ludovico, whom she! 
assisted by Catenna, nursed with the utmoa 



rJLJ^jt.. . 



TME MYSTEIilES Otf UDOLPJIO. 5 

CAfe ; and Emily was of course left much The moments passed, but still Bamardinc 

nlone. Her thoughts often dwelt on the message did not appear ; and Emily, becoming uneasy, 

of the porter, and were employed in conjee- hesitated whether to wait any longer. Shd 

turing the subject that occasioned it ; which would have sent Annette to the portal to 

she sometimes imagined concerned the fate of hasten him, but feared to be left alone : for it 

Madame Montoni ; at others, that it related was now almost dark, and a melancholy 

to some personal danger which threatened streak of red, that still hngered in the west, 

herself. The cautious secrecy which Barnar- was the only vestige of departed day. The 

dine observed in his conduct, inclined her to strong interest, however, which Bamardinc's 

believe the latter. message had awakened, overcame other appre- 

As the hour of appointment drew near, her hensions, and still detained her. 

impatience increased. At length the sun While she was conjecturing with Annette 

set : she heard the passing steps of the sen- what could thus occasion his absence, they 

tinels going to their posts, and waited only heard a key turn in the lock of the gate near 

for Annette to accompany her to the terrace ; them, and presently saw a man advancing, 

who soon after came, and they descended It was Bamardine ; of whom Emily hastily 

together. When Emily expressed apprehen- inquired what he had to communicate, and 

sions of meeting Montoni or some of his desired that he would tell her quickly — ' for I 

guests — ' O ! there is no fear of that, ma'am- am chilled with this evening air,' said she. 

selle,' said Annette; 'they are all set in to 'You must dismiss your maid, lady,' said 

feasting yet ; and that Bamardine knows.' the man in a voice the deep tone of which 

They reached the first terrace, where the shocked her : ' what I have to tell is to you 

sentinels demanded who passed; and Emily, only.' 

having answered, walked on to the east Emily, after some hesitation, desired An- 

rampart ; at the entrance of which they were nette to withdraw to a little distance. — ' Now, 

again stopped; and having again replied, my friend, what would you say ?' 

were permitted to proceed. But Emily did He was silent a moment, as if considering ; 

not like to expose herself to the discretion of and then said, 

these men at such an hour ; and impatient to ' That which would cost me my place, at 

withdraw from the situation, she stepped least, if it came to the signor's ears. You 

hastily on in search of Bamardine. He was must promisft, lady, that nothing shall ever 

not yet come. She leaned pensively on the make you tell a syllable of the matter. I have 

wall of the rampart, and waited for him. been tmsted in this affair ; and if it was known 

The gloom of twilight sat deep on the sur- that I betrayed my tmst, my life perhaps 

rounding objects, blending in soft confusion might answer it : but I was concerned for 

the valley, the mountains, and the woods, you, lady ; and I resolved to tell you. ' He 

whose tall heads stirred by the evening breeze paused. 

gave the only sounds that stole on silence — Emily thanked him ; assured him that he 

except a faint, faint chorus of distant voices might repose on her discretion : and entreated 

that arose from within the castle. him to dispatch. 

' What voices are those?' said Emily as she 'Annette told us in the hall how unhappy 

fearfully listened. you vras about Signora Montoni, and how 

• It is only the signor and his guests carous- much you wished to know what was become 

ing,' replied Annette. of her.' 

'Good God!' thought Emily, 'can this ' Most true,' said Emily eagerly : 'and you 

man's heart be so gay when he has made can inform me? I conjure you tell me the 

another being so wretched? — if, indeed, my worst without hesitation.' She rested her 

aunt is yet suffered to feel her wretchedness 1 trembling arm upon the wall. 

O ! whatever are my own sufferings, may my 'I can tell you,' said Bamardine, and 

heart never, never be hardened against those paused. 

of others !' Emily had no power to enforce her en- 
She looked up with a sensation of horror to treaties, 
the east turret, near which she then stood. 'I can tell you,' resumed Bamardine; — 

A light glimmered through the grates of the — ^but ' 

lower chamber, but those of the upper one ' But what ?' exclaimed Emily, recovering 

were dark. Presently she perceived a person her resolution. 

moving with a lamp across the lower room : ' Here I am, ma'amselle,' said Annette ; 

but this circumstance revived no hope con- who, having heard the eager tone in which 

ceraing Madame Montoni, whom she had Emily pronounced these words, came running 

vainly sought in that apartment, which had towards her. 

appeared to contain only soldiers' accoutre- ' Retire I' said Bamardine sternly : ' you 

ments : Emily, however, determined to attempt are not wanted :' and as Emily said nothing, 

the outer door of the turret as soon as Barnar- Annette obeyed. 

dine should withdraw; and, if it was unfastened, * I can tell you,' repeated the porter ; — ' but 

to make another effort to discover her aunt I know not how : — ^you was afflicted Jbefty:^—! 



d THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

' I am prepared for the worst, my friend/ 'The signora is alive,' said he, ' forme. S\\6 

said Emily in a firm and solemn voice ; ' I is my prisoner, though : his Excellenza has 

can support any certainty better than this shut her up in the chamber over the great gates 

suspense.' of the coiut, and I have the charge of her. I 

• Well, signora, if that is the case, you shall was going to have told you you might sec her 
hear. — You know, I suppose, that the signor —but now * 

and his lady used sometimes to disagree. It Emily, reUeved from an unutterable load of 

is none of my concerns to inquire what it was anguish by this speech, had now onl^ to ask 

about ; but I believe you know it was so.' Bamardine's forgiveness, and to conjure that 

• Well,' said Emily, ' proceed.' he would let her visit her aunt 

• The signor, it seems, had lately been very He complied with less reluctance than she 
wroth against her. I saw all, and heard all — expected ; and told her that if she would re- 
a great deal more than people thought for ; — pair on the following night, when the signor 
but it was none of my business, so I said was retired to rest, to the postern gate of the 
nothing. A few days ago, the signor sent for castle, she should perhaps see Madame Mon- 
me. " Bamardinc," says he, "you are — an toni. 

honest man : I think I can trust you." I as- Amid all the thankfulness which Emily felt 

sured his ExcelUnza that he could. " Then," for this concession, she thought she observed 

says he — as near as I can remember — " I have a malicious triumph in his manner when he 

an affair in hand which I want you to assist me pronounced the last words*; but in the next 

in." Then he told me what I was to do ; but moment she dismissed the thought ; and, 

that 1 shall say nothing about — it concerned having again thanked him, commended her 

only the signora.' aunt to his pity, and assured him that she 

' O heavens !' exclaimed Emily — ' what have herself would reward him, and would be ptmo- 

you done ?' tual to her appointment : she bade him good- 

Bamardinc hesitated, and was silent. night, and retired, unobserved, to her chamber. 

• What fiend could tempt him or you to It was a considerable time before the tumult 
such an act ?' cried Emily, chilled with horror of joy, which Barnardine's unexpected intelli- 
and scarcely able to support her fainting spirit, gence had occasioned, allowed Emily to think 

'It was a fiend,' said Bamardinc in a with clearness, or to be conscious of the real 
gloomy tone of voice. They were now both dangers that still surrounded Madame Mon- 
silent : Emily had not courage to inquire toni and herself. When this agitation sub- 
further, and Bamardinc seemed to shrink from sided, she perceived that her aunt was yet the 
telling more. At length he said, ' It is of no prisoner of a man to whose veng^eance or 
use to think of the past. The signor was avarice she might fall a sacrifice : and when 
cmel enough, but he would be obeyed. What she further considered the savage aspect of the 
signified my refusing ? He would have found person who was appointed to guard Madame 
others who had no scruple. ' Montoni, her doom appeared to be already 

'You have murdered her, then I' said Emily scaled — for the countenance of fiamardine 

in a hollow and inward voice — ' I am talking seemed to bear the stamp of a murderer ; and 

with a murderer !' Bamardinc stood silent ; when she looked upon it, she felt inclined to 

while Emily turned from him, and attempted believe that there was no deed, however black, 

to leave the place. which he might not be prevailed upon to exe- 

' Stay, lady !' said he. ' You deserve to cute. These reflections brought to her 

think so still — since you can believe me capable remembrance the tone of voice in which he 

of such a deed.' had promised to grant her request to see his 

' If you are innocent, tell me quickly,' said prisoner ; and she mused upon it long, in 

Emily m famt accents ; ' for I feel I shall not uneasiness and doubt. Sometimes she even 

be able to hear you long.' hesitatedwhethertotrust herself with him at the 

'I will tell you no more,' said he, and lonely hour he had appointed ; and once, and 

walked away. Emily had just strength enough only once, it struck her, that Madame Montoni 

to bid him stay, and then to call Annette ; on might be already murdered, and that this 

whose arm she leaned, and they walked ruffian was appointed to decoy herself to some 

slowly up the rampart till they heard steps secret place, where her life also was to be 

behmd them. It was Bamardinc again. sacrificed to the avarice of Montoni, who then 

'bend away the girl,' said he, 'and I will would claim securely the contested estates in 

tell you more.' Languedoc. The consideration of the enor- 

biie must not go,' said Emily : 'what you mity of such guilt did, at length, relieve her 

nave to say she may hear. ' from the belief of its probability, but not from 

May she so, lady?' said he. 'You shall all the doubts and fears which a recoUecUon 

^io?vTJ^.° ^'r^® S?^^/ .^^^ ^® was going, though of Bamardine's manner had occasioned. From 

r'.9PnL^nt ^ aP ^ anj^ety overcoming the these subjects her thoughts at length passed 

hkwouT wi rl! ^^^''u'''^'^^ ^^^ '"^"'s ^- ^° "^^"^^^ •• a^cl, as the evening advanced/^ 

and bade Ann JJf'f-^^^"^'*^ ^^"^ ^° ^^y- remembered with somewhat more than surprise 

ana oaae Annette rcture. the music she had heard on the preceding 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



I 



night, and nfm awaited its return with more 
than curiosity. 

She distinguished, till a late hour, the dis • 
tant carousals of Montoni and his companions 
— the loud contest, the dissolute laugh, and 
the choral song, that made the halls re-echo. 
At length she heard the heavy gates of the 
castle shut for the night, anci those sounds 
instantly sunk into a silence which was dis- 
turbed only by the whispering steps of persons 
passing through the galleries to their remote 
rooms. Emily now, judging it to be about 
the time when she had heard the music on the 
preceding night, dismissed Annette, and gently 
opened the casement to watch for its return. 
The planet she had so particularly noticed, at 
the recurrence of the music, was not yet risen ; 
but with superstitious weakness she kept her 
eyes fixed on that, part of the hemisphere 
where it would rise, almost expecting that, 
when it appeared, the sounds would return. 
At length it came, serenely bright, over the 
eastern towers of the castle. Her heart 
trembled when she perceived it ; and she had 
scarcely courage to remain at the casement, 
lest the returning music should confirm her 
terror, and subdue the little strength she yet 
retained. The clock soon after struck one ; 
and knowing this to be about the time when 
the sounds had occurred, she sat down in a 
chair near the casement, and endeavoured to 
compose her spirits ; but the anxiety of ex- 
pectation yet disturbed them. Everything, 
however, remained still: she heard only the 
solitary step of a sentinel, and the lulling 
murmur of the woods below : and she again 
leaned from the casement, and again looked, 
as if for intelligence, to the planet, which was 
now risen high above the towers. 

Emily continued to listen — ^but no music 
came. * Those were surely no mortal sounds I' 
said she, recollecting their entrancing melody : 
• no inhabitant of this castle could utter such : 
and where is the feeling that could modulate 
such exquisite expression ? We all know that 
it has been affirmed celestial sounds have 
sometimes been heard on earth. Father 
Pierre and Father Antoine declared that they 
had sometimes heard them in the stillness of 
night, when they alone were waking to offer 
their orisons to Heaven. Nay, my dear 
father himself once said, that soon after my 
mother's death, as he lay watchful in grief, 
sounds of uncommon sweetness called him 
from his bed ; and on opening his window he 
heard lofty music pass along the midnight air. 
It soothed him, he said : helooked up with con- 
fidence to heaven, and resigned her to his God.' 

Emily paused to weep at this recollection. 
'Perhaps,' resumed she — 'perhaps those 
strains I heard were sent to comfort, to en- 
courage me ! Never shall I forget those I 
heard, at this hour, in Languedoc I Perhaps 
my father watches over me at this moment I' 
She wept again in tenderness. Thus passed 



the hour in watchfulness and solemn thought 
— but no sotmds returned ; and, after remain- 
ing at the casement till the light tint cxf dawn 
began to edge the mountain-tops, and steal 
upon the night shade,* she concluded that 
they would not return, and retired reluctantly 
to repose. 



CHAPTER XXVL 

' I will advise you where to plant yourselves. 
Acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time. 
The moment on't ; for t must be done to-night.' 

Macbeth. 

Emily was somewhat surprised, on the fol- 
lowing day, to find that Annetto had heard of 
Madame Montoni's confinement in the cham- 
ber over the portal^ as well as of her pur- 
posed visit there on the approaching night. 
That the circumstance which Bamardine had 
so solemnly enjoined her to conceal, he had 
himself told to so indiscreet a hearer as 
Annette appeared very improbable, though he 
had" now charged her with a message concern- 
ing the intended interview. He requested 
that Emily would meet him, unattended, on 
the terrace at a httle after midnight, when he 
himself would lead her to the place he had 
promised ; a proposal from which she imme- 
diately shrunk, for a thousand vague fears 
darted athwart her mind, such as had tor- 
mented her on the preceding night, and which 
she neither knew how to trust nor to dismiss. 
It frequently occurred to her, that Bamardine 
might have deceived her concerning Madame 
Montoni, whose murderer, perhaps, he really 
was ; and that he had deceived her by order 
of Montoni, the more easily to draw her into 
some of the desperate designs of the latter. 
The terrible suspicion that Madame Montoni 
no longer lived, thus came, accompanied by 
one not less dreadful for herself. Unless the 
crime by which the aunt had suffered was 
instigated merely by resentment, unconnected 
with profit, a motive upon which Montoni 
did not appear very likely to act, its object 
must be unattained till the niece was also 
dead, to whom Montoni knew that his wife's 
estates must descend. EmUy remembered 
the words which had informed her that the 
contested estates in France would devolve to 
her if Madame Montoni died without con- 
signing them to her husband : and the former 
obstinate perseverance of her aunt made it 
too probable that she had to the last withheld 
them. At this instant recollecting Bamar- 
dine's manner on the preceding night, she 
now believed what she then had fancied, that 
it expressed malignant triumph. She shud- 
dered at the recollection which confirmed her 
fears, and determined not to meet him on the 
terrace. Soon after, she was inchned to con- 
sider these suspicions as the extravagant 



8 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 



exaggerations of a timid and harassed mind, 
and could not believe Montoni liable to such 
preposterous depravity as that of destroying 
from one motive his \irifc and her niece. She 
blamed herself for suffering her romantic 
imagination to carry her so far beyond the 
bounds of probability, and determined to 
endeavour to check its rapid flights lest they 
should sometimes extend into madness. Still, 
however, she shrunk from the thought of 
meeting RuTiardine on the terrace at mid- 
night ; and still the wish to be relieved from 
this terrible suspense concerning her aunt, to 
see her. and to soothe her suiferings, made 
her hesitate what to do. 

' Yet how is it possible, Annette, I can pass 
to the terrace at that hour ?' said she, recol- 
lecting herself ; ' the sentinels will stop me, 
and Signer Montoni will hear of the affair.' 

' O ma'amselle ! that is well thought of,' 
replied Annette. ' That is what Barnardine 
told me about. He gave me this key, and 
bade me say it unlocks the door at the end of 
the vaulted gallery that opens near the end of 
the east rampart, so that you need not pass 
any of the men on watch. He bade me say 
too, that his reason for requesting you to 
come to the terrace was because he could 
take you to the place you want to go to with- 
out opening the great doors of the liall, which 
grate so heavily. ' 

Emily's spirits were somewhat calmed by 
this explanation, which seemed to be honestly 
given to Annette. ' But why did he desire I 
would come alone, Annette ?' said she. 

' Why that was what I asked him myself, 
ma'amselle. Says I, " Why is my young 
lady to come alone ?— Surely I may come with 
her? — What harm can / do?" But he said, 
" No — no— I tell you not," in his gruff way. 
' ' Nay, ' ' says I , " I have been trusted in as great 
affairs as this, I warrant, and it's a hard matter 
if I can't keep a secret now." Still he would 
say nothing but " No— no— no." "Well," 
says I, " if you will only trust me, I will tell 
you a great secret, that was told me a month 
ago, and I have never opened my lips about 
it yet — so you need not be afraid of telling 
me." But all would not do. Then, ma'am- 
selle, I went so far as to offer him a beau- 
tiful new sequin, that I-udovico gave mc for a 
keepsake, and I would not have parted with 
it for all St. Marco's Place ; but even that 
would not do ! Now what can be the reason 
of this ? But I know, you know, ma'am, who 
you are going to see. * 

• Pray did Barnardine tell you this ?' 

' He ! No, ma'amselle, that he did not.' 

Emily inquired .who did ; but Annette 
showed that she could keep a secret. 

During the remainder of the day Emily's 
mind was agitated with doubts and fears and 
contrary determinations, on the subject of 
meeting this Barnardine on the rampart, and 

submitting herself to liJ5 gvddaacft skx^sQaxwly 



knew whither. Pity for her aunt, and anxiety 
for herself, alternately swayed her determi- 
nation, and night came before she had decided 
upon her conduct. She heard the castle dock 
strike eleven — twelve — and yet her mind 
wavered. The time, however, was now come 
when she could hesitate no longv : and then 
the interest she felt for her aunt overcame 
other considerations ; and bidding Annette 
follow her to the outer door of the vaulted 
gallery, and there await her return, she de- 
scended from her chamber. The castle was 
perfectly still ; and the great hall, where so 
lately she had witnessed a scene of dreadful 
contention, now returned only the whi^perinj[ 
footsteps of the two solitary figures gliding 
fearfully between the pillars, and gleamed 
only to the feeble lamp they carried. Emily, 
deceived by the long shadows of the pillais ' 
and by the catching lights between, often 
stopped, imagining she saw some person 
moving in the distant obscurity of the per- 
spective ; and as she passed these pillars, she 
feared to turn her eyes towards them, almost 
expecting to see a figure start out firom bdiind 
their broad shaft She reach^, however, 
the vaulted gallery without interruption, bat 
unclosed its outer door with a trembling hand; 
and charging Annette not to quit it, and to ke^ 
it a little open, that she might be heard if she 
called, she delivered to her the lamp, whidi 
she did not dare to take herself, because of 
the men on watch, and, alone, stepped cot 
upon the dark terrace. Bverything was so 
still, that she feared lest her own light steps 
should be heard by the distant sentinels ; and 
she walked cautiously towards the spot where 
she had before met Barnardine, listening for 
a sound, and looking onward through the 
gloom in search of him. At lengdi she was 
startled by a deep voice that spoke near her, 
and she piused, uncertain whether it was his, 
till it spoke again, and she then recognised 
the hollow tones of Barnardine, who had been 
punctual to the moment, and was at the 
appointed place resting on the rampart walL 
After chiding her for not coming sooner, and 
saying that he had been waiting nearly half 1 
an hour, he desired Emily, who made no * 
reply, to follow him to the door through 
which he had entered the terrace. 

While he unlocked it, she looked back to 
that she had left, and observing the rays of 
the lamp stream through a small opening, 
was certain that Annette was still there. But 
her remote situation could little befriend 
Emily, after she had quitted the terrace • and 
when Barnardine unclosed the gate, the dismal 
aspect of the passage beyond, shown by a 
torch burning on the pavement, made her i 
shrink from following him alone, and she i 
refused to go, unless Annette might accom- 1 
pany her. This, however, Barnardine abso- 
lutely refused to permit, mingling at the same 
time with his refus^ sughartfid wciuustancei 



fHA MYSTBRlkS OP UDOLPHO. 

to heighten the pity and curiosity of Emily was shocked by an instantaneous presentiment 
towards her aunt, that she at length consented that this was the grave of her unfortunate 
to follow him alone to the portal. aunt, and that the treacherotis Bamardine was 
He then took up the torch, and led her leading herself to destruction. The obscure 
along the passage, at the extremity of which and terrible place to which he had conducted 
he unlocked another door, whence they her seemed to justify the thought ; it was a 
descended a few steps into a chapel, which, place suited for murder, a receptacle for the 
as Bamardine held up the torch to light her, dead, where a deed of horror might be corn- 
Emily observed to be in ruins ; and she im- mitted, and no vestige appear to proclaim it. 
mediately recollected a former conversation of Emily was so overwhelmed with terror, that 
Annette concerning it, with very unpleasant for a moment she was unable to determine 
emotions. She looked fearfully on the almost what conduct to pursue. She then considered 
roofless walls green with damps, and on the that it would be vain to attempt an escape 
g^othic points of the windows where the ivy from Bamardine by flight, since the length 
and the briony had long supplied the place of and intricacy of the way she had passed 
glass, and ran* mantling among the broken would soon enable him, who was acquainted 
capitals of some columns that had once sup- with the turnings, to overtake her, and whose 
ported the roof. Bamardine stumbled over feebleness would not suffer her to run long 
the broken pavement, and his voice, as he with swiftness. She feared equally to irritate 
uttered a sudden oath, was retumed in hollow him by a disclosure of her suspicions, which 
echoes that made it more terrific. Emily's a refusal to accompany him further certainly 
heart sunk ; but she still followed him, and he would do ; and since she was already as 
turned out of what had been the principal much in his power as it was possible she 
aisle of the chapel. 'Down these steps, lady,' could be, if she proceeded, she at length 
said Bamardine, as he descended a flight determined to suppress, as far as she could, 
which appeared to lead into the vaults ; but the appearanc€ of apprehension, and to follow 
Emily paused on the top, and demanded silently whither he designed to lead her. 
in a tremulous tone whither he was conduct- Pale with horror and anxiety, she now waited 
ing her. till Bamardine had trimmed the torch ; and 
' To the portal,' said Bamardine. as her sight glanced again upon the grave, 
' Cannot we go through the chapel to the she could not forbear inquiring for whom it 
portal ?' said Emily. was prepared. He took his eyes from the 

• No, signora, that leads to the inner court, torch, and fixed them upon her face without 
which I don't choose to unlock. This way, speaking. She faintly repeated the question ; 
and we shall reach the outer court presently.' but the man, shaking the torch, passed on : 

Emily still hesitated ; fearing not only to and she followed, trembling, to a second 

go on, but, since she had gone thus far, flight of steps, having ascended which, a door 

to irritate Bamardine by refusing to go fur- deUvered them into the first cbiut of the 

ther. castle. As they crossed it, the light showed 

'Come, lady,' said the man, who had nearly the high black walls around them, fringed 

reached the bottom of the flight, ' make a little with long grass and dank weeds that found a 

haste ; I cannot wait here aU night. ' scanty soil among the mouldering stones ; 

* Whither do these steps lead ?' said Emily, the heavy buttresses, with here and there 
yet pausing. between them a narrow grate, that admitted 

'To the portal,' repeated Bamardine in an a freer circulation of air to the court ; the 

angry tone ; ' I will wait no longer. ' As he massy iron gates that led to the castle, whose 

said this, he moved on with the light: and clustering turrets appeared above ; and, oppo- 

Emily, fearing to provoke him by further site, the huge towers and ajrch of the portal 

delay, reludlantly followed. From the steps itself. In this scene, the large uncouth per- 

they proceeded through a passage adjoining son of Bamardine bearing the torch formed a 

the vaults, the walls of which were dropping characteristic figure. This Bamardine was 

with unwholesome dews, and the vapours wrapt in a long dark cloak, which scarcely 

that crept along the ground made the torch allowed the kind of half-boots, or sandals, 

burn so dimly, that Emily expected every mo- that were laced upon his legs, to appear, and 

raent to see it extinguished ; and Bamardine showed only the point of a broad sword, 

could scarce find his way. As they advanced, which he usually wore, slung in a belt across 

these vapours thickened ; and Bamardine his shoulders. On his head was a heavy flat 

believing the torch expiring, stopped for a velvet cap, somewhat resembling a turban, in 

moment to trim it. As he then rested against which was a short feather ; the visage beneath 

a pair of iron gates that opened from the it showed strong features, and a countenance 

passage, Emily saw by uncertain flashes of furrowed with the lines of cunning and 

light the vaults beyond, and near her heaps darkened by habitual discontent, 

of earth that seemed to surround an open The view of the court, however, reanimated 

grave. Such an object in such a scene would Emily, who, as she crossed silently towards 

at any time have disturbed her ; but now she the portal, begaxv. \.q ^^"^ ^^cAX\kKS( ^s^m.Ss»ssk> 



fo 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPtiO, 



and not the treachery of Barnardine, had assailed her, returned at this instant with re- 
deceived her. She looked anxiously up at doubled force ; and no longer appeared b'ke 
the first casement, that appeared above the the exaggerations of a timid spirit, but seemed 



lofty arch of the portcullis ; but it was dark, 
and she inquired whether it belonged to the 
chamber where Madame Montoni was con- 
fined. Emily spoke low, and Barnardine 
perhaps did not hear her question, for he 
returned no answer ; and they soon after 
entered the postern door of the gateway, 
which brought them to the foot of a narrow 
staircase that wound up one of the towers. 

' Up this staircase the signora lies,' said 
Barnardine. 



to have been sent to warn her of her fate. 
She now did not doubt that Madame Mon- 
toni had been murdered, perhaps in this venr 
chamber ; or that she herself was brougnt 
hither for Ae same purpose. The counten- 
ance, the manners, and the recollected words 
of Barnardine when he had spoken of her 
aunt, confirmed her worst fears. For some 
moments she was incapable of considering of 
any means by which she might attempt an 
escape. Still she listened, but heard foot- 



• Lies !' repeated Emily faintly, as she began steps neither on the stairs nor in the room 

to ascend. ' above ; she thought, however, that she again 

'She lies in the upper chamber,' said Bar- distinguished Bamardine's voice below, and 

nardine. went to a grated window, that opened upon 

As they passed up, the wind, which poured the court, to inquire further. Here she 

through the narrow cavities in the wall, made plainly heard his hoarse accents mingling 

the torch flare, and it threw a stronger gleam with the blast that swept by, but they were 



upon the grim and sallow countenance of 
Eteir nardine, and discovered more fully the 
desolation of the place — the rough stone 
walls, the spiral stairs black with age, and a 
suit of ancient armour, with tin iron visor, 
that hung upon the walls, and appeared a 
trophy of some former victory. 

Having reached a landing-place, ' You may 
wait here, lady,' said he, applying a key to the 
door of a chamber, ' while I go up and tell 
the signora you are coming.' 



lost again so quickly that their meaning could 
not be interpreted ; and then the light of a 
torch, which seemed to issue from the portal 
below, flashed across the court, and the long 
shadow of a man, who was under the arch- 
way, appeared upon the pavement. Emily, 
from the hugeness of this sudden portrait, 
concluded it to be that of Barnardine ; but 
other deep tones which passed in the wind 
soon convinced her he was not alone, and 
that his companion was not a person very 



That ceremony is unnecessary,' replied liable to pity. 
Emily; 'my aunt will rejoice to see me.' When her spirits had overcome the first 

'I am not sure of that,' said Barnardine, shock of her situation, she held up the lamp 



pointing to the room he had opened ; 
in here, lady, while I step up. ' 

Emily, surprised and somewhat shocked, 
did not dare to oppose him further ; but, as 
he was turning away with the torch, desired 
he would not leave her in darkness. He 



Come to examine if the chamber afforded a possi- 
bility of an escape. It was a spacious room, 
whose walls, wainscoted with rough oak, 
showed no casement but the grated one 
which Emily had left, and no other door than 
that by which she had entered. The feeWe 



looked around, and, observing a tripod lamp Vays of the lamp, however, did not allow her 



that stood on the stairs, lighted and gave it 
to Emily, who stepped forward into a large 
old chamber, and he closed the door. As 
she listened anxiously to his departing steps. 



;o see at once its full extent ; she pxerceived 
lo furniture, except, indeed, an iron chair 
astened in the centre of the chamber, im- 
nediately over which, depending on a diain 



she thought he descended, instead of ascend- ifrom the ceiling, hung an iron ring. Having 
ing, the stairs : but the gusts of wind that gazed upon these for some time with wonder 
whistled round the portal would not allow her and hoiTor, she next observed iron bars below, 
to hear distinctly any other sound. Still, made for the purpose of confining the feet, 
however, she listened, and perceiving no step and on the arms of the chair were rings of 
in the room above, where he had affirmed the same metal. As she continued to sur\'ey 
Madame Montoni to be, her anxiety in- ] them, she concluded that they were iiJStru- 
creased though she considered that the Iments of torture ; audit struck her that some 
thickness of the floor in this strong building poor wretch had once been fastened in this 
might prevent any sound reaching her from chair, and had there been starved to death, 
the upper chamber. The next moment, in a She was chilled by the thought ; but what 



pause of the wind, she distinguished Bar- 
nardine's step descending to the court, and 
then thought she heard his voice ; but the 
rising gust again overcoming other sounds, 
Emily, to be certain on this point, moved 



was her agony when, in the next moment, it 
occurred to her that her aunt might have 
been one of these victims, and that she her- 
self might be the next ! An acute pain 
seized her head, she was scarcely able to nold 



^.oftly to the door, which, on attempting to the lamp ; and, looking round for support. 
open it, she discovered was faslened. M\ v^a.^ ?>^iax.\Tv^ herself, untfonsciously, in the 
the horrid apprehensions that had \3L\.e\7 woxv ^\i'aca \\s^ \ \i\i\ ^xbA^^xA^ \^erceiving 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, zi 

where she was, she started from it in horror, remoter ramparts and the woods below to the 

and sprung towards a remote end of the obscurity of night. 

room. Here again she looked round for a ' What do you waste time for, there ?' said 

seat to sustain her, and poiceived only a dark Barnardine with an oaUi, as he approached 

curtain, which, descending from the ceiling to the horsemen. ' Despatch — despatch !' 
the floor, was drawn along the whole side of ' The saddle will be ready in a minute,' 
the chamber. Ill as she was, the appearancei replied the man who was buckling it, at whom 

of this curtain struck her, and she paused to J Barnardine now swore again for his negli- 

gaze upon it in wonder and apprehension. gence ; and Emily, calling feebly for help, was 

It seemed to conceal a recess of the cham- hurried towards the horses, while the ruffians 

ber ; she wished, yet dreaded, to lift it, and ' disputed on which to place her, the one 

to discover what it veiled ; twice she was designed for her not bemg ready. At this 

withheld by a recollection of the terrible moment a cluster of lights issued from the 
spectacle her daring hand had formerly un-^ great gates, and she immediately heard the 

veiled in an apartment of the castle, till, shrill voice of Annette above those of several 

suddenly conjecturing that it concealed the other persons who advanced. In the same 

body of her murdered aunt, she seized it in a moment she distinguished Montoni and 
fit of desperation, and drew it aside. Beyond/ Cavigni, followed by a number of ruffian- 
appeared a corpse stretched on a kind of low! faced fellows, to whom she no longer looked 
couch which was crimsoned with human blood,' with terror, but with hope ; for at this instant 

as was the floor beneath. The features, de- she did not tremble at the thought of any 

formed by death, were ghastly and horrible, dangers that might await her within the 

and more than one livid wound appeared in castle, whence so lately, and so anxiously, 

the face. Emily, bending over the body, [she had wished to escape. Those which 

gazed, for a moment, with an eager, frenzied [threatened her from without had engrossed all 

eye ; but, in the next, the lamp dropped from 'her apprehensions. 

her hand, and she fell senseless at the foot of A short contest ensued between the parties, 

the couch. in which that of Montoni, however, were pre- 

When her senses returned, she found her- sently victors ; and the horsemen, perceiving 

self surrounded by men, among whom was that numbers were against them, and being, 

Barnardine, who were lifting her from the perhaps, not very warmly interested in the 

floor, and then bore her along the chamber, affair they had undertaken, galloped off, 

She was sensible of what passed ; but the ex- while Barnardine had run far enough to be 

treme languor of her spirits did not permit lost in the darkness, and Emily was led back 

her to speak, or move, or even to feel any into the castle. As she re-passed the courts, 

distinct fear. They carried her down the the remembrance of what she had seen in the 

staircase by which she had ascended ; when portal chamber came with all its horror to her 

having reached the archway they stopped, and mind ; and when, soon after, she heard the 

one of the men, taking the torch from Barnar- gate close that shut her once more within the 

dine, opened a small door that was cut in the castle walls, she shuddered for herself, and, 

great gate, and as he stepped out upon the almost forgetting the danger she had escaped, 

road, the light he bore showed several men on could scarcely think that anything less pre- 

horscback in waiting. Whether it was the cious than liberty and peace was to be found 

freshness of the air that revived Emily, or beyond them. 

that the objects she now saw roused the spirit Montoni ordered Emily to await him in the 

of alarm, she suddenly spoke, and made an cedar parlour, whither he soon followed, and 

ineffectual effort to disengage herself from the then sternly questioned her on this mysterious 

grasp of the ruffians who held her. affair. Though she now viewed him with 

Barnardine, meanwhile, called loudly for horror, as the murderer of her aunt, and 
the torch, while distant voices answered, and scarcely knew what she said to his impatient 
in the same instant a light flashed upon the inquiries, her answers and her manner con- 
court of the castle. Again he vociferated for vinced him that she had not taken a voluntary 
the torch, and the men hurried Emily tlirough part in the late scheme, and he dismissed her 
the gate. At a short distance, under the upon the appearance of his servants, whom 
shelter of the castle walls, she perceived the he had ordered to attend, that he might in- 
fellow who had taken the light from the porter, quire further into the affair, and discover those 
holding it to a man busily employed in alter- who had been accomplices in it. 
ing the saddle of a horse, round which were Emily had been some time in her apartment 
several horsemen looking on, whose harsh before the tumult of her mind allowed her to 
features received the full glare of the torch ; remember several of the past circumstances, 
while the broken ground beneath them, the Then, again, the dead form which the curtain 
opposite walls, with the tufted shrubs that in the portal-chamber had disclosed, came to 
overhung their summits, and an embattled her fancy, and she uttered a groan, which, 
watch-tower above, were reddened with the terrified Annette tXv^ xaax^^ ^^^\x;Sp5 \ssC^'crt'a. 
gleam, which fading gradually away, left the to salisiy Yvti q.>3j\q^\Vj ora. ^^ ^xCoNpRN. ^'^ ^^ 



xa THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

for she feared to trust her with so fatal a Annette having had discretion enough not to 

secret, lest her indiscretion should call down interrupt her tears. This girl, as afiectionate 

the immediate vengeance of Montoni on her- as she was simple, lost in these moments 

self. all her former ^cars of remaining in the 

Thus compelled to bear within her own chamber, and watched alone by Emily during 

mind the whole horror of the secret that the whole night, 
oppressed it, her reason seemed to totter 

under the intolerable weight. She often fixed ~"" 

a wild and vacant look on Annette, and, when r r T \ ptr R v w ri 

she spoke, either did not hear her or answered UliAi'iJLK axVJL 

from the purpose. Long fits of abstraction * Unfold 

succeeded ; Annette spoke repeatedly, but What worlds, or what vast regions, hold 

her voice seemed not to make any impression The immortal mind, that hath forsook 

on the sense of the long-agitated EmUy, who ^c*" mansion m this fleshly no^ !' 

sat fixed and silent, except that now and then ^^ ±'ensbroso. 

she heaved a heavy sigh, but without tears. Emily's mind was refreshed by sleep. On 

Terrified at her condition, Annette at length waking in the morning, she looked with a 

left the room to inform Montoni of it, who surprise on Annette, who sat sleeping in a chair 

had just dismissed his ser\'ants, without beside the bed, and then endeavoured to recol- 

having made any discoveries on the subject lect herself; but the circumstances of the pre- 

of his inquiry. The wild description which ceding night were swept from her memory, 

this girl now gave of Emily, induced him to which seemed to retain no trace of what had 

follow her immediately to the chamber. passed, and she was still gazing with surprise 

At the sound of his voice Emily turned her on Annette, when the latter awoke, 
eyes, and a gleam of recollection seemed to ' O dear ma'amselle ! do you know me?* 

shoot athwart her mind ; for she immediately cried she. 

rose from her seat, and moved slowly to a 'Know you! certainly,' replied Emily; 

remote part of the room. He spoke to her ' you are Annette ; but why are you sitting by 

in accents somewhat softened from their usual me thus ?' 

harshness, but she regarded him with a kind ' O you have been very ill, ma'amselle,— 

of half curious, half terrified look, and very ill indeed ! and I am sure I thought — ' 
answered only 'Yes,' to whatever he said. 'This is very strange!' said Emily, still 

Her mind still seemed to retain no other im- trying to recollect the past, — ' But I think I 

pression than that of fear. do remember that my fancy has been haunted 

Of this disorder Annette could give no ex- by frightful dreams. Good God !' she added, 

planation ; and Montoni, having attempted suddenly starting, ' siu-ely it w^as nothing more 

for some time to persuade Emily to talk, retired than a dream. ' 

after ordering Annette to remain with her She fixed a terrible look upon Annette, 

during the night, and to inform him in the who, intending to quiet her, said, ' Yes, 

morning of her condition. ma'amselle, it was more than a dream, but it 

When he was gone, Emily again came is all over now.' 
forward, and asked who it was that had ' She is murdered, then !' in an inward 

been there to disturb her. Annette said voice, and shuddering instantaneously. An- 

it was the signor — Signer Montoni. Emily nette screamed ; for being ignorant of the 

repeated the name after her several times, circumstance to which Emily referred, she 

as if she did not recollect it, and then sud- attributed her manner to a disordered fancy • 

denly groaned, and relapsed into abstraction, but when she had explained to what her oviii 

With some difficulty Annette led her to the speech alluded, Emily, recollecting the 

bed, which Emily examined with an eager, attempt that had been made to carry her oflf, 

phrensied eye, before she lay down ; and then, asked if the contriver of it had been dis- 

pointing with a shuddering emotion to An- covered. Annette replied that he had not. 

nette, who, now more terrified, went towards though he might easily be guessed at - and 

the door, that she might bring one of the then told Emily she might thank her for her 

female servants to pass the night with them : deliverance, who, endeavouring to command 

but Emily, observing her going, called her by the emotion which the remembrance of her 

name, and then, in the naturally plaintive tone aunt had occasioned, appeared calmly to 

of her voice, begged that she, too, would not listen to Annette, though, in truth, she heard 

forsake her. — 'For since my father died,' scarcely a word that was said, 
added she sighing, 'everybody forsakes me.' 'And so, ma'amselle,' continued the latter 

' Your father, ma'amselle !' said Annette, * I was determined to be even with Bamardinc 

* . u^^ ^^"^^ before you knew me. ' for refusing to tell me the secret, by finding^ it 

' He was, indeed I' rejoined Emily ; and out myself ; so I watched you on the ten^e 

ncr tears began to flow. She now wept and as soon as he had opened the door It ♦£ 

.M,?/^ ^ ?"^ ^°"fi^ • ^f^^^ ^^•^^^^^' bec<>ining end. I stole out from the castle, to trv t r; frJ 

f/w'tc calm, sl)e at Icn-th suu\^ \q ^\^c^. '^^'^'^'^.^^">>^^>^^>'^^^''^«astue no good qa^^^ 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. X3 

be planned, or why all this secrecy ?" So, sure himself ready for enterprise and difficulty, 
enough, he had not bolted the door after him ; The porter of the castle, who had served him 
and when I opened it, I saw by the glimmer on a former occasion, willingly accepted a 
of the torch, at the other end of the passage, second bribe ; and, having concerted the 
which way you were going. I followed the means of drawing Emily to the gates, Morano 
light, at a distance, till you came to the vaults publicly left the hamlet, whither he had 
of the chapel, and there I was afraid to go been carried after the affray, and withdrew 
further, for I had heard strange things about with his people to anoUier at several miles 
these vaults. But then, again, I was afraid to distance. From thence, on a night agreed 
go back, all in darkness, by myself; so by upon by Barnardine, who had discovered, 
the time Barnardine had trimmed the light, I from the thoughtless prattle of Annette, the 
had resolved to follow you ; and I did so, till most probable means of decoying Emily, the 
you came to the great court, and there I was count sent back his servants to the castle, 
afraid he would see me ; so I stopped at the while he awaited her arrival at the hamlet, 
door again, and watched you across to the with an intention of carrying her immediately 
gates, and when you was gone up the stairs, to Venice. How this his second scheme was 
I whipt after. There, as I stood under the frustrated, has already appeared ; but the 
gate-way, I heard horses' feet without, and violent and various passions with which this 
several men talking ; and I heard them Italian lover was now agitated, on his return 
swearing at Barnardine for not bringing you to that city, can only be imagined, 
out ; and just then he had like to have Annette having made her report to Mon- 
caught me, for he came down the stairs toni of Emily's health and of her request to 
again, and I had hardly time to get out see him, he rephed that she might attend him 
of his way. But I had heard enough of in the cedar-room in about an hour. It was 
his secret now, and I determined to be even on the subject that pressed so heavily on her 
with him, and to save you, too, ma'amselle, mind, that Emily wished to speak to him ; 
for I guessed it to be some new scheme of yet she did not distinctly know what good 
Count Morano, though he was gone away, purpose this could answer, and sometimes she 
I ran into the castle, but I had hard work to even recoiled in horror from the expectation 
find my way through the passage imder the of his presence. She wished also to petition, 
chapel ; and what is very strange, I quite though she scarcely dared to believe the re- 
forgot to look for the ghosts they had told quest would be granted, that he would permit 
me about, though I would not go into that her, since her aunt was no more, to return to 
place again by myself for the world ! Luckily her native country. 

the signer and Signor Cavigni were up, so we As the moment of interview approached, 
had soon a train at our heels, sufficient to her agitation increased so much, that she 
frighten that Barnardine and his rogues alto- almost resolved to excuse herself under what 
gether. ' could scarcely be called a pretence of illness ; 

Annette ceased to speak, but Emily still and when, she considered what could be said 
appeared to listen. At length she said sud- either concerning herself or the fate of her 
denly, 'I think I will go to him myself; — aunt, she was equally hopeless as to the event 
where is he ?' of the entreaty, and terrified as to its effect 

Annette asked who was meant. upon the vengeful spirit of Montoni. Yet, to 

' Signor Montoni,' rephed Emily. ' I pretend ignorance of her death appeared, in 
would speak with him ;' and Annette, now some degree, to be sharing its criminality : 
remembering the order he had given on the and, indeed, this event was the only ground 
preceding night, respecting her young lady, on which Emily could rest her petition for 
rose, and said she would seek him herself. leaving Udolpho. 

This honest girl's suspicions of Count While her thoughts tlius wavered, a mes- 
Morano were perfectly just ; Emily, too, sage was brought, importing that Montoni 
when she thought on the scheme, had attri- could not see her till the next day ; and her 
buted it to him ; and Montoni, who had not a spirits were then relieved for a moment from 
doubt on this subject also, began to believe that an almost intolerable weight of apprehension, 
it was by the direction of Morano that poison Annette said, she fancied the chevaliers were 
had formerly been mingled with his wine. going out to the wars again, for the comtyard 

The professions of repentance which Morano was filled with horses, and she heard that the 
had made to Emily, under the anguish of his rest of the party who went out before were 
wound, were sincere at the moment he offered expected at the castle. ' And I heard one of 
them: but he h^.d mistaken the subject the soldiers, too,' added she, ' say to his com- 
of his sorrow ; for while he thought he rade, that he would warrant they'd bring 
was condemning the cruelty of his late design, home a rare deal of booty. So thinks I, if 
he was lamenting only the state of suffering the signor can, with a safe conscience, send 
to which it had reduced him. As these suf- his people out a-robbing — why it is no business 
ferings abated, his former views revived, till of mine ; I only wish I was once safe out oC 
his health being re-established, he again found this castle ; and, \i \\. V^aA \ka\.\5R,^\j^ Vs^ v=^^ 



14 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



Ludo\-ico*s sake, I ^-ould have let Count 
Morano's people run away with us both, for 
it would have been senhig you a good turn, 
ma'aniaelle, as well as myself.' 

Annette might have continued thus talking 
for hours, for any interruption she would have 
received from Emiiy, who was silent, inatten- 
tive, absorbed in thought, and passed the 
whole of this day in a kind of solemn tran- 
quillity, such as is often the result of faculties 
ovcr5i'r.iined by suffering. 

When night returned, Emily recollected the 
mysterious strains of music that she had 
lately heard, in which she still felt some 
degree of interest, and of which she hoped 
to hear again the soothing sweetness. The 
influence of supjerstitign now gained on the 
weakness of her long-harassed mind ; she 
looked with enthusiastic expectation to the 
guardian spirit of her father, and having dis- 
missed Annette for the night, determined to 
watch alone for their return. It was not yet, 
however, near the time when she had heard 
the music on a former night ; and anxious to 
call off her thoughts from distressing subjects, 
she sat down ^ith one of the few books that 
she had brought from France ; but her mind, 
refusing control, became restless and agitated, 
and she went often to the casement to listen 
for a sound. Once, she thought she heard a 
voice ; but then, everything without the case- 
ment remaining still, she concluded that her 
fancy had deceived her. 

Thus passed the time till twelve o'clock, 
.soon after which the distant sounds that mur- 
mured through the castle ceased, and sleep 
seemed to reign over all. Emily then seated 
herself at the casement, where she was soon 
recalled from the reverie into which she sunk, 
by very unusual sounds, not of music, but 
like the low mourning of some person in 
distress. As she listened, her heart faltered 
in terror, and she became convinced that the 
former sound was more than imaginary. 
Still, at intervals, she heard a kind of feeble 
lamentation, and sought to discover whence it 
canic. There were several rooms underneath, 
adjoining Ihe rampart, whick had been long 
shut up ; and as the sound probably rose 
from one of these, she leaned from the case- 
ment to observe whether any light was visible 
there. The chambers, as far as she could 
perceive, were quite dark, but at a little 
distance, on the rampart below, she thought 
she saw something move. 

The faint twilight which the stars shed, did 
not enable her to distinguish what it was ; but 
.she judged it to be a sentinel on watch ; and 
.*:hc removed her liglit to a reniotcipart of the 
cliamber, that she might escape notice durin"- 
her further observation. 

, The same object sUll appeared. Prcsentlv 

u advanced along the rampart towards her 

inn(/ow, and she then dislingmshed some- 

lining iij^e a human form ; but tVve sW^iv^ift 



with which it moved convinced her it was no 
sentinel. As it drew near, she hesitated 
whether to retire ; a thrilling curiosity in- 
clined her to stay, but a dread of she scarcely 
knew what warned her to withdraw. 

While she paused, the figure came opposite 
to her casement, and was stationary. Every- 
thing remained quiet ; she had not heard even 
a footfall ; and the solenmity of this silence, 
with the mysterious form she saw, subdued 
her spirits, so that she was moving from the 
casement, when, on a sudden, she observed 
the figure start avva^, and glide down the 
mmpart, after which it was soon lost in the 
obscurity of night. Emily continued to gaze 
for some time on the way it had passed, and 
then retired within her chamber, musing on 
this strange circumstance, and scsircely doubt- 
ing that she had witnessed a supernatural ap- 
pearance. 

When her spirits recovered composure, she 
looked round for some other explanation. 
Remembering what she had heanl of the 
daring enterprises of Montoni, it occurred to 
her that she had just seen some unhappy 
person, who, ha\'ing been plundered by his 
banditti, was brought hither a captive ; and 
that the music she had formerly heard, came 
from him. Yet, if they had plundered him, 
it still appeared improbable that they should 
have brought him to the castle ; and it was 
also more consistent with the manners of 
banditti to murder those they rob, than to 
make them prisoners. But what more than 
any otlier circumstance contradicted the sup- 
position that it was a prisoner, was, that it 
wandered on the terrace without a guard ; a 
consideration which made her dismiss imme- 
diately her first surmise. 

Afterwards she was inclined to believe that 
Count Morano had obtained admittance into 
the castle ; but she soon recollected the diffi- 
culties and dangers that must have opposed 
such an enterprise, and that if he had so for 
succeeded, to come alone and in silence to 
her casement at midnight, was not the con- 
duct he would have adopted, particularly smce 
the private staircase communicating wth her 
apartment was known to him ; neiUier would 
he have uttered the dismal sounds she had 
heard. 

Another suggestion represented that this 
might be some person who had designs upon 
the castle ; but the mournful sounds destroyed 
also that probability. Thus, inquiry only 
perplexed her. Wlio, or what, it could be 
that haunted this lonely hour, complaining in 
such doleful accents and in such sweet music 
(for she was still inclined to believe that the 
former strains and the late appearance were 
connected), she had no means of ascertaining ; 
and imagination again assumed her empire, 
and roused the mysteries of superstition. 

She determined, however, to watch on the 
ioWoNNXXv^ ^^^^\^^ >«V^x. W doubts mighl 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



XS 



peAaps be cleared up ; and she almost re- 
solved to address the figure, if it should appear 
again. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

* Such are those thick and gloomy shadows damp; 
Oft seen in charnel-vaults and sepulchres. 
Lingering, and sitting by a new-made grave.' 

Milton. 

On the following day Montoni sent a second 
excuse to Emily, who was surprised at the 
circumstance. ' This is very strange !' said 
she to herself : * his conscience tells him the 
purport of my visit, and he defers it to avoid 
an explanation.' She now almost resolved to 
throw herself in his way, but terror checked 
the intention ; and this day passed as the pre- 
ceding one, with Emily, except that a degree 
of awful expectation, concerning the approach- 
ing night, now somewhat disturbed the dread- 
ful calmness that had pervaded her mind. 

Towards evening the second part of the 
band which had made the first excursion 
among the mountains returned to the castle, 
where as they entered the courts, Emily, in 
her remote chamber, heard their loud shouts 
and strains of exultation, like the orgies of 
furies over some horrid sacrifice. She even 
feared they were about to commit some bar- 
barous deed ; a conjectmre from which, how- 
ever, Annette soon relieved her, by telling 
that the people were only exulting over the 
plunder they had brought with them. This 
circumstance still further confirmed her in the 
behef that Montoni had really commenced to 
be a captain of banditti, and meant to retrieve 
his broken fortunes by the plunder of tra- 
vellers ! Indeed, when she considered aU the 
circumstances of his situation — in an armed 
and almost inaccessible castle, retired far 
among the recesses of wild and solitary 
mountains, along whose distant skirts were 
scattered towns and cities, whither wealthy 
travellers were continually passing — this ap- 
peared to be the situation of all others most 
suited for the success of schemes of rapine ; 
and she yielded to the strange thought, that 
Montoni was become a captain of robbers. 
His character also, unprincipled, dauntless, 
cruel, and enterprising, seemed to fit him for 
the situation. Dehghting in the tumult and 
in the struggles of life, he was equally a 
stranger to pity and to fear ; his very courage 
was a sort of animal ferocity ; not the noble 
impulse of a principle such as inspirits the 
mind against the oppressor in the cause of 
the oppressed ; but a constitutional hardiness 
of nerve that cannot feel, and that, therefore, 
cannot fear. 

Emily's supposition, however natural, was 
in part erroneous ; for she was a stranger to 
the state of this country, and to the circum- 



stances under which Its frequent wars were 
partly conducted. The revenues of the many 
states of Italy being at tKat time insufficient to 
the support of standing armiei, even during the 
short periods which the turbulent habits both 
of the governments and the people permitted 
to pass in peace, an order of men arose not 
known in our age, and but faintly described 
in the history of their own. (X the soldiers 
disbanded at the end of every war, few 
returned to the safe but unprofitable occu- 
pations then usual in peace. Sometimes they 
passed into other countries, and mingled with 
armies which still kept the field. Sometimes 
they formed themselves into bands of robbers, 
and occupied remote fortresses, where their 
desperate character, the weakness of the 
governments which they offended, and the 
certainty that they could be recalled to the 
armies when their jjresence should be again 
wanted, prevented them from being much 
pursued by the civil "fiower ; and sometimes 
they attached themselves to the fortunes of a 
popular chief, by whom they were led into 
the service of any state which could settle 
with him the price of their valouix From 
this latter practice arose their name — Con- 
dottieri ; a term formidable all over Italy, 
for a period which concluded in the earlier 
part of the seventeenth century, but of which 
it is not so easy to asoertain the commence- 
ment. 

Contests between the smaller states were 
then, for the most part, affairs of enterprise 
alone ; and the probabUities of success were 
estimated, not from the skill but from the 
personal courage of the general and the 
soldiers. I'he ability which was necessary to 
the conduct of tedious operations, was little 
valued. It was enough to know how a party 
might be led towards their enemies with the 
greatest secrecy, or conducted from them in 
the compactest order. The officer was to 
precipitate himself into a situation where, but 
for his example, the soldiers might not have 
ventured ; and as the opposed parties knew 
little of each other's strength, the event of the 
day was frequently determined by the boldness 
of the first movements; In such services the 
Condoitieri were eminent ; and in these, 
where plunder always followed success, their 
characters acquired a mixture of intrepidity 
and profligacy which awed even those whom 
they served. 

When they were not thus engaged, their 
chief had usually his own fortress, in which, 
or in its neighbourhood, they enjoyed an 
irksome rest ; and though their wants were 
at one time partly supplied from the property 
of the inhabitants, the lavish distribution of 
their plunder at others prevented them from 
being obnoxious ; and the peasants of su«*i 
districts gradually shared the character of 
their warlike visitors. The neighbouring 
governments sorc«l\scv^^'^XQ{fe,^ft^>\iNb&.^^^>si\sw 



i6 



THE .VYSTEJ^IES OF VDOLPHO. 



endeavoured, to suppress these military ccm- 
munities ; both because it was difficult to do 
so, and because a disguised protection of them 
ensured for the service of their wars a body of 
men who could not otherwise be so cheaply 
maintained or so perfectly qualified, llie 
commanders sometimes even relied so far 
upon this policy of the several powers as to 
frequent their capitals ; and Montoni, having 
met them in the gaming parties of Venice and 
Padua, conceived a desire to emulate their 
characters before his ruined fortunes tempted 
him to adopt their practices. It was for the 
arrangement of his present plan of life that 
the midnight councils were held at his man- 
sion in Venice, and at which Orsino and some 
other members of the present community 
then assisted with suggestions which they 
had since executed with the wreck of their 
fortunes. 

On the return of night, Emily resumed 
her station at the casement. There was now 
a moon ; and as it rose over the tufted 
woods, its yellow light scn'cd to show the 
lonely terrace and the surrounding objects 
more distinctly than the twilight of the stars 
had done, and promised Emily to assist her 
observations, should the mysterious form re- 
turn. On this subject she again wavered in 
conjecture, and hesitated whether to speak to 
the figure, to which a strong and almost 
irresistible interest urged her ; but terror, at 
intervals, made her reluctant to do so. 

' If this is a person who has designs upon 
the castle,' said she, ' my curiosity may 
prove fatal to me ; yet the mysterious music 
and the lamentations I heard, must surely 
have proceeded from him : if so, he cannot 
be an enemy. ' 

She then thought of her unfortunate aunt, 
and shuddering with grief and horror, the 
suggestions of imagination seized her mind 
with all the force of truth, and she believed 
that the form she had seen was supernatural. 
She trembled, breathed with difficulty, an icy 
coldness touched her cheeks, and her fears 
for awhile overcame her judgment. Her 
resolution now forsook her, and she deter- 
mined, if the figure should appear, not to 
speak to it. 

Thus the time passed as she sat at her 
casement, awed by expectation and by the 
gloom and stillness of midnight ; for she saw 
obscurely in the moonlight only the mountains 
and woods, a cluster of towers that formed 
the west angle of the castle, and the terrace 
below ; and heard no sound except now and 
then the lonely watchword passed by the 
sentinels on duty, and afterwards the steps of 
the men who came to relieve guard, and 
whom she knew at a distance on the rampart 
by their pikes that glittered in the moon- 
beam and then by the few short words in 
which the^ hailed their fellows of the night. 
Emily retired within her chamber while thoy 



passed the casement When she returned to 
It, all was again quiet It was now very late ; 
she was wearied with watching, and bqgan to 
doubt the reality of what she had seen on the * 
preceding night ; but she still lingered at the 
window, for her mind was too perturbed to 
admit of sleep. The moon shone with a 
clear lustre that afforded her a complete view 
of the terrace ; but she saw only a solitary 
sentinel pacing at one end of it ; and at length, 
tired wi5i expectation, she withdrew to seek 
rest 

Such, however, was the impression left on 
her mind by the music and the complaining 
she had formerly heard, as well as by the 
figure which she fancied she had seen, that 
she determined to repeat the watch on the 
following night 

Montoni on the next day took no notice 
of Emily's appointed visit ; but she, more 
anxious than before to see him, sent Annette 
to inquire at what hour he woidd admit her. 
He mentioned eleven o'clock, and Emily was 
punctual to the moment ; at which she called 
up all her fortitude to support the shock di 
his presence, and the dreadful recollections it 
enforced. He was with several of his officers 
in the cedar room ; on observing whom she 
paused ; and her agitation increased while he 
continued to converse with them, apparently 
not observing her, till some of his officers 
tiuning round saw Emily, and uttered an 
exclamation. She was hastily retiring wten 
Montoni's voice arrested her, and in a ^tering 
accent she said, 'I would speak with you, 
Signor Montoni, if you are at leisure. ' 

* These are my friends,' he replied ; • what- 
ever you would say they may hear. ' 

Emily, without replying, turned from the 
rude gaze of the chevaliers ; and Montoni 
then followed her to the hall, whence he led 
her to a small room, of which he shut the 
door with violence. As she looked on his 
dark countenance, she again thought she saw 
the murderer of her aunt ; and her mind was 
so convulsed with horror, that she had not 
power to recall thought enough to explain the 
purport of her visit ; and to trust hers^ with 
the mention of Madame Montoni was more 
than she dared. 

Montoni at length impatiently inquired 
what she had to say. ' I have no time for 
trifling,' he added, 'my moments are im- 
portant.' 

Emily then told him that she wished to 
return to France, and came to beg that he 
would permit her to do so. — But when he 
looked surprised, and inquired for the motive 
of the request, she hesitated, became paler 
than before, trembled, and had nearly sunk at 
his feet. He observed her emotion with 
apparent indifference, and interrupted the 
silence by telling her he must be gone. Emily, 
however, recalled her spirits sufficiently to 
enaMo hot to repeat her request. And when 



THE MV STORIES OF UDOLPIID. i7 

Montoni absolutely refused it, her slumbering formed a striking contrast to the complexion 

mind was roused. of Orsino, remarked not the action, and con- 

' I can no longer remain here with pro- tinued boldly declaiming against cowards to 

priely, sir,' said she, 'and I may be allowed Cavigni, who was slyly laughing at his vche- 

to ask by what right you detain me ?' mence, and at the silent mortification of Orsino, 

' It is my will that you remain here,' said when the latter, retiring a few steps beliind, 

Montoni, laying his hand on the door to go ; drew forth a stiletto to stab his adversary in 

* let that suffice you.' the back. Montoni arrested his half-extended 

Emily, considering that she had no appeal arm, and with a significant look made him 

from this will, forbore to dispute his right, return the poniard into his bosom, unseen by 

and made a feeble effort to persuade him to all except himself ; for most of the party were 

be just. 'While my aunt lived, sir,' said she disputing at a distant window, on the situa- 

in a tremulous voice, ' my residence here was tion of a dell where they meant to form an 

not improper : but now that she is no more, ambuscade. 

I may surely be permitted to depart. My When Verezzi had turned round, the deadly 

stay cannot benefit you, sir, and will only hatred expressed on the features of his 

distress me. ' opponent, raising, for the first time, a suspi- 

' Who told you that Madame Montoni was cion of his intention, he laid his hand on his 

dead ?' said Montoni with an inquisitive eye. sword, and then, seeming to recollect himself, 

Emily hesitated, for nobody had told her so, strode up to Montoni. 

and she did not dare to avow the having seen ' Signor,' said he, with a significant look at 

that spectacle in the portal-chamber which had Orsino, ' we are not a band of assassins ; if 

compelled her to the belief. you have business for brave men, employ me 

' Who told you so ?' he repeated more on this expedition ; you shall have the last 

sternly. drop of my blood : if you have any work for 

'Alas ! I know it too well,' replied Emily : cowards — keep him,' pointing to Orsino, 'and 

• spare me on this terrible subject.' let me quit Udolpho.' 

She sat down on a bench to support herself. Orsino, still more incensed, again drew 

' If you wish to see her,' said Montoni, 'you forth his stiletto, and rushed towards Ve- 

may ; she lies in the east turret.' rezzi, who at the same instant advanced with 

He now left the room without awiaiting her his sword, when Montoni and the rest of the 

reply, and returned to the cedar chamber, party interfered and separated them, 

where such of the chevaliers as had not before ' This is the conduct of a boy,' said Montoni 

seen Emily began to rally him on the dis- to Verezzi, ' not of a man : be more moderate 

covery they had made ; but Montoni did not in your speech. ' 

appear disposed to bear this mirth, and they ' Moderation is the virtue of cowards,* 

changed the subject. retorted Verezzi ; ' they are moderate in every 

Having talked with the subtle Orsino on thing — ^but in fear. ' 

the plan of an excursion which he meditated ' I accept vour words,' said Montoni, 

for a future day, his friend advised that they turning upon him with a fierce and haughty 

should He in wait for the enemy ; which look, and drawing his sword out of the 

Verezzi impetuously opposed, reproached scabbard. 

Orsino with want of spirit, and swore that if ' With all my heart,' cried Verezzi, ' though 

Montoni would let him lead on fifty men, he I did not mean them for you.' 

would conquer all that should oppose him. He directed a pass at Montoni : and while 

Orsino smiled contemptuously ; Montoni they fought, the villain Orsino made another 
smiled too, but he also listened. Verezzi then attempt to stab Verezzi, and was again pro- 
proceeded with vehement declamation and vented. 

assertion, till he was stopped by an argument The combatants were at length separated : 
of Orsino, which he knew not how to answer and, after a very, long and violent dispute, 
better than by invective. His fierce spirit reconciled. Montoni then left the room with 
detested the cunning caution of Orsino, whom Orsino, whom he detained in private con- 
he constantly opposed, and whose inveterate sulfation for a considerable time, 
though silent hatred he had long ago incurred. Emily, meanwhile, stunned by the last 
And Montoni was a calm obser\'er of both, words of Montoni, forgot, for the moment, 
whose different qualifications he knew, and his declaration that she should continue in 
how to bend their opposite character to the the castle, while she thought of her unfortu- 
perfection of his own designs. But Verezzi nate aunt, who, he had said, was laid in the 
in the heat of opposition, now did not scruple east turret. In suffering the remains of his 
to accuse Orsino of cowardice ; at which the wife to lie thus long unburied, there ap- 
countenance of the latter, while he made no peared a degree of brutality more shocking 
reply, was overspread with a livid paleness ; than she had suspected even Montoni could 
and Montoni, who watched his lurking eye, practise. 

saw him put his hand hastily into his bosom. After a long struggle she determined to 

But Verezzi, whose face glowing with crimson accept his perm\?>svo\\Xc>N\^\\.N2a& vscsx^^^v.^-a:^^ 



,8 THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO, 

to take a last look of her ill-fated aunt : * I do live,' replied Madame Montoni, * but 

with this design she returned to her chamber, — I feel that I am about to die. ' 

and, while she waited for Annette to accom- Emily clasped the hand she held, more 

pany her, endeavoured to acquire fortitude eagerly, and groaned. They were both silent 

sufficient to support her through the approach- for some moments. Then Emily endeavoured 

ing scene ; for, though she trembled to en- to soothe her, and inquired what had reduced 

counter it, she knew that . to remember the her to this present deplorable state. 

Eerformance of this last act of duty would Montoni, when he removed her to the 

ereafter afford her consoling satisfaction. turret under the improbable suspicion of 

Annette came, and Emily mentioned her having attempted his life, had ordered the 

purpose, from which the former endeavoured men emplo3'ed on the occasion to observe a 

to dissuade her, though without effect, and strict secrecy concerning her. To this he 

Annette was with much difficulty prevailed was influenced by a double motive. He 

upon to accompany her to .the turret ; but no meant to debar her from the comfort of 

consideration could make her promise to enter Emily's visits, and to secure an opportunity 

the chamber of death. of privately despatching her, should any new 

They now left the corridor, and having circumstances occur to confirm the present 
reached the foot of the staircase, which Emily suggestions of his suspecting mind. His con- 
had formerly ascended, Annette declared she sciousness of the hatred he deserved, it was 
would go no further, and Emily proceeded natural enough should at first lead him to 
alone. When she saw the track of blood attribute to her the attempt that had been 
which she had before observed, her spirits made upon his life ; and though there was no 
fainted, and being compelled to rest on the other reason to believe that she was concerned 
stairs, she almost determined to proceed no in that atrocious design, his suspicions re- 
further. The pause of a few moments restored mained ; he continued to confine her in the 
her resolution, and she went on. turret, under a strict guard ; and, without 

As she drew near the landing-place upon pity or remorse, had suffered her to lie, for- 

which the upper chamber opened, she re- lorn and neglected, under a raging fever, tfll 

membered that the door was formerly it had reduced her to the present state, 

fastened, and apprehended that it might stiU The track of blood which Emily had seen 

be so. In this expectation, however she was on the stairs, had flowed from the unbound 

mistaken ; for the door opened at once into wound of one of the men employed to carry 

a dusky and silent chamber, round which she Madame Montoni, and which he had recehred 

fearfully looked, and then slowly advanced, in the late affray. At night these men. having 

when a hollow voice spoke. Emily, who contented themselves with securing the door 

was unable to speak, or to move from the of their prisoner's room, had retired from 

spot, uttered no sound of terror. The voice guard ; and then it was that Emily, at the 

spoke again ; and then, thinking that it time of her first inquiry, had found the turret 

resembled that of Madame Montoni, Emily's so silent and deserted. 

spirits were instantly roused ; she rushed to- When she had attempted to open the door 

wards a bed that stood in a remote part of of the chamber, her aunt was sleeping, and 

the room*, . and drew aside the curtains, this occasioned the silence which had contri- 

Within, appeared a pale and emaciated face, buted to delude her into a belief that she was 

She started back, then again advanced, shud- no more ; yet had her terror permitted her to 

dered as she took up the skeleton hand that persevere longer in the call, she would prob- 

lay stretched upon the quilt ; then let it drop, ably have awakened Madame Montoni, and 

and tlien viewed the face with a long unsettled have been spared much suffering. The spec- 

gaze. It was that of Madame Montoni, tacle in the portal chamber, which afterwaids 

though so changed by illness that the re- confirmed Emily's hoiTible suspicion, was the 

semblance of what it had been could scarcely corpse of a man who had fallen in the aflfray, 

be traced in what it now appeared. She was and the same which had been borne into the 

still alive, and, raising her heavy eyes, she servants' hall, where she took refuge from the 

turned them on her niece. tumult. This man had lingered under his 

• Where have you been so long ?' said she wounds for some days ; and, soon after his 
in thesame hollow tone ; ' I thought you had death, his body had been removed, on the 
forsaken me. ' couch on which he died, for interment in the 

• Do you indeed live,' said Emily, at length, vault beneath the chapel, through which 
' or is this but a terrible apparition ?' She Emily and Bamardine had passed to the 
received no answer, and again she snatched chamber. 

up the hand. ' This is substance,' she ex- Emily, after asking Madame Montoni a 

claimed ; ' but it is cold — cold as marble I' thousand questions concerning herself, left 

She let it fall. ' O, if you really live, speak !' her, and sought Montoni ; for the more 

said Emily in a voice of desperation, ' that solemn interest she felt for her aunt, made her 

/ inny not Jose my senses — say you know t^o^n xci^-ardless of the resentment her remon- 

'^'c /' sx.T^xvcti'a m\^x ^tw< ^v^^.V'tx^lC, and of the 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 19 

improbability of his granting what she meant Rest was, indeed, necessary to Emily, whose 
to entreat. spirits and frame were equally wearied by the 

'Madame Montoni is now dying, sir,' said occurrences and exertions of the day ; but 
Emily, as soon as she saw him. ' Your re- she would not leave Madame Montoni till 
sentment, surely, will not pursue her to the after the turn of midnight, a period then 
last moment ! Suffer her to be removed from thought so critical by the physicians, 
that forlorn room to her own apartment, and Soon after twelve, having enjoined Annette 
to have necessary comforts administered. ' to be wakeful, and to call her should any 

'Of what service will that be, if she is changeappearfortheworse, Emily sorrowfully 
dying ?' said Montoni, with apparent indif- bade Madame Montoni good-night and with- 
ference. drew to her chamber. Her spirits were more 

• The service, at least, of saving you, sir, than usually depressed by the piteous con- 
from a few of those pangs of conscience you dition of her aunt, whose recovery she scarcely 
must suffer, when you shall be in the same dared to expect. To her own misfortunes 
situation,' said Emily with imprudent indig- she saw no period, inclosed as she was, in a 
nation : of which Montoni soon made her remote castle, beyond the reach of any 
sensible, by commanding her to quit his friends, had she possessed such, and beyond 
presence. Then, forgetting her resentment, the pity even of strangers ; while she knew 
and impressed only by compassion for the herself to be in the power of a man capable 
piteous state of her aunt dying without sue- of any action which his interest or his am- 
cour, she submitted to humble herself to bition might suggest. 

Montoni, and to adopt every persuasive Occupied by melancholy reflections and by 
means that might reduce him to relent to- anticipations as sad, she did not retire imme- 
wards his wife. diately to rest, but leaned thoughtfully on her 

For a considerable time he was proof open casement. The scene before her of 
against all she said, and all she looked ; but woods and mountains reposing in the moon- 
at length the divinity of pity, beaming in light, formed a regretted contrast with the 
Emily's eyes, seemed to touch his heart. He state of her mind ; but the lonely murmur of 
turned away, ashamed of his better feelings, these woods, and the view of this sleeping 
half sullen and half relenting ; but finally landscape, gradually soothed her with emo* 
consented that his wife should be removed to tions, and softened her to tears, 
her own apartment, and that Emily should She continued to weep, for some time, lost 
attend her. Dreading equally that this relief to everything but to a gentle sense of her mis- 
might arrive too late, and that Montoni fortunes. When she at length took the hand- 
might retract his concession, Emily scarcely kerchief from her eyes, she perceived, before 
stayed to thank him for it ; but, assisted by her, on the terrace below, the figure she had 
Annette, she quickly prepared Madame Mon- formerly observed, which stood fixed and 
toni's bed, and they carried her a cordial that silent immediately opposite to her casement, 
might enable her feeble frame to sustain the On perceiving it, she started back, and terror 
fatigue of a removal. for some time overcame ciuriosity ; at length 

Madame was scarcely arrived in her own she returned to the casement, and still the 
apartment, when an order was given by her figure was before it, which she now com- 
husband that she should remain in the turret ; pelled herself to observe ; but was utterly un- 
but Emily, thankful that she had made such able to speak, as she had formerly intended, 
despatch, hastened to inform him of it, as The moon shone with a clear light, and it was 
well as that a second removal would instantly perhaps the agitation of her mind that pre- 
prove fatal ; and he suffered his wife to con- vented her distinguishing, with any degree of 
tinue where she was. accuracy, the form before her. It was still 

During this day, Emily never left Madame stationary, and she began to doubt, whether 
Montoni, except to prepare such little nourish- it was really animated. 

ing things as she judged necessary to sus- Her scattered thoughts were now so far 
tain her, and which Madame Montoni re- returned, as to remind her that her light ex- 
ceived with quiet acquiescence, though she posed her to dangerous observation, and she 
seemed sensible that they could not save her was stepping back to remove it, when she 
from approaching dissolution, and scarcely perceived the figure move, and then wave 
appeared to wish for life. Emily meanwhile what seemed to be its arm, as if to beckon her ; 
watched over her with the most tender solici- and while she gazed, fixed in fear, it repeated 
tude, no longer seeing her imperious aunt in the action. She now attempted to speak, but 
the poor object before her, but the sister of the words died on her lips, and she went from 
lier late beloved father, in a situation that the casement to remove her Ught ; as she was 
called for all her compassion and kindness, doing which, she heard from without a faint 
When night came, she determined to sit up groan. Listening, but not daring to retm-n, 
with her aunt ; but this the latter positively she presently heard it repeated, 
forbade, commanding her to retire to rest, ' Good God ! what can this megji^' "^-^^ 
and Annette alone to remain in her chamber, shQ. 



20 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



Again she listened, but the sound came no 
more ; and after a long intenal of silence, 
she recovered courage enough to go to the 
casement, when she again saw the same ap- 
pianince ! It beckoned again, and again 
ultered a low sound. 

• 'I'hat groan was surely human !' said she. 
' I xoill speak. — Who is it,' cried Emily in a 
faint voice, ' that wanders at this late hour?' 

The figure raised its head, but suddenly 
started away, and glided down the terrace. 
She watched it for a long while passing 
swiftly in the moonlight, but heard no foot- 
step, till a sentinel from the other extremity 
of the rampart walked slowly along. The 
man stopped under her window, and, looking 
up, called her by name. She was retiring 
precipitately ; but a second summons in- 
ducing her to reply, the soldier then respect- 
fully asked if she had seen anything pass. 
On her answering that she had, he said no 
more ; but walked away down the terrace, 
I'.mily following him with her eyes, till he was 
Itjst in the distance. But, as he was on 
j;uard, she knew he could not go beyond the 
rampart, and therefore resolved to wait his 
ri'lum. 

Soon after, his voice was heard at a dis- 
tance, calling loudly ; and then a voice still 
more distant answered, and in the next 
moment the watchword was given, and passed 
along the terrace. As the soldiers moved 
hastily imder the casement, she called to in- 
cjuire what had happened, but they passed 
wilhor.t regarding her. 

Emily's thoughts returning to the figure she 
had seen, ' It cannot be a person who has 
designs upon the castle,' said she; ' such a 
one would conduct himself very differently. 
1 le would not venture \\ here sentinels were on 
watch, nor fix himself ojjposite to a v.indow 
wl'.oiv he i)ereeivcd he must be observed : 
much less would he beckon, or utter a sound 
of complaint. Yet it cannot be a prisoner, 
for how could he obt:i:n the opportunity to 
wanJvr ilui-?' 

If she had been subject to vanity, she 
might have supposed this figure to be some 
inliabiLint of the castle, who wandered under 
the casement in tl.e hope of seeing her, and 
o\ being allowed to declare his admiration : 
but this opinion never occurred to Emily ; 
iindif it had. she would have dismissed it as 
i:nprobab!o, on considering that, when the 
opportunity of speaking had occurred, it had 
1 een suircred to pass in silence ; and that, 
i-.en at the moment in wliich she had spoken' 
^'*?/?"" ^^•'^^ abmptly quilted the place. 

\\ lule she mused, two sentinels walked ud 
the ramijart m earnest conversation, of \Wroh 



that came at intervals. As they drew near, 
she perceived this to be the voice of him who 
walked in the middle, apparently supported 
by his comrades ; and she again called to 
them, inquiring what had happened. At 
the sound of her voice they stopped, and 
looked up, while she repeated her question, 
and was told that Roberto, their feUow of 
the watch, had been seized with a fit, and 
that ihis cry as he fell had caused a false 
alarm. 

' Is he subject to fits ?' said Emily. 

' Yes, signora,' rephed Roberto ; ' but if I 
had not, what I saw was enough to have 
frightened the Pope himself.' 

• What was it ?' inquired Emily trembling. 

' I cannot tell what it was, lady, or what I 
saw, or how it vanished,' replied the soldier, 
who seemed to shudder at the recollection 

' Was it the person whom you followed 
down the rampart, that has occasioned you 
this alarm ?' said Emily, endeavouring to con- 
ceal her own. 

• Person !' exclaimed the man, — ' it \i*as the 
Devil, and this is not the first time I have seen 
him !' 

• Xor will it be the last,* obser\'ed one of 
his comrades, laughing. 

• No, no, I warrant not,' said another. 

• Well,' rejoined Roberto, ' you may be as 
merry now as you please ; you was none so 
jocose the other night, Sebastian, when you 
was on watch with Launcelot.* 

' Launcelot need not talk of that,' replied 
Sebastian ; ' let him remember how he stood 
trembling, and unable to g^ve the word, till 
the man was gone. If the man had not come 
so silendy upon us, I would have seized him, 
and soon made him tell who he was. * 

' What man ?' inquired Emily. 

• It was no man, lady,' said Launcelot, who 
stood by, ' but the Devil himself, as my com- 
rade says. WTiat man, who does not live 
in the casde, could get within the walls at 
midnight ? Why I might just as well pretend 
to march to \'enice, and get among all the 
Senators when they are counselling ; and 
I warrant I should have more chance of 
getting out again alive, than any fellow that 
we should catch within the gates after dark. 
So I think I have proved plainly enough that 
this can be nobody that lives out'of the castle ; 
and now I will prove that it can be nobody 

that lives in the castle — for, if he did why 

should he be afraid to be seen ? So after 
this, I hope nobody will pretend to tell me it 





""y^S^S:^ advancing from the 'bottom 
ot -r^ tcrmce. but she hoarvl ouK a low vQioe! 



him. 

• Wlien did you see the figure then, beforer 
sa:d Lmily. half smiimg ; who, though she 
lhoug:U the conversation somewhat too much. 
fe:t an interest which would not rv-r^Jt k^; 
to conclude it. 



not permit her 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPIIO. 



31 



'About a week ago, lady,' said Sebastian, 
taking up the story. 

• And where ?' 

' On the rampart, lady, higher up.' 

' Did you pursue it, that it fled?' 

' Xo, signora. Launcelot and I were on 
watch together, and everything was so still 
you might have heard a mouse stir, when 
suddenly Launcelot says — "Sebastian! do 
you see nothing ?" I turned my head a little 
io the left, as it might be — thus. " No," says 
I. " Hush !" said Launcelot, — " look yonder 
— ^just by the last cannon on the rampart !" 
I looked, and then thought I did see some- 
thing move ; but there being no light but 
what the stars gave, 1 could not be certain. 
We stood quite silent, to watch it, and pre- 
sently saw something pass along the castle- 
wall, just opposite to us !' 

•Why did you not seize it then?' cried a 
soldier, who had scarcely spoken till now. 

' Aye, why did you not seize it ?' said Ro- 
berto. 

' You should have been there to have done 
tliat,' replied Sebastian: 'you would have 
been bold enough to have taken it by the 
throat, though it had been the Devil him- 
self ; v.c could not take such a liberty, per- 
haps, because we are not so well acquainted 
with him as you arc. But, as I was saying, 
it stole by us so quickly, that we had not time 
to get rid of our surprise before it was gone. 
Then, we knew it was in vain to follow. We 
kept constant watch all that night, but we 
saw it no more. Next morning we told some 
of our comrades, who were on duly on other 
]oarts of the ramparts, what we had seen ; but 
Ihey had seen nothing, and laughed at us, and 
it was not till to-night that the same figure 
walked again. ' 

' Where did you lose it, friend ?' said Emily 
to Roberto. 

'When I left you, lady,' replied the man, 
* you might see me go down the rampart, but 
it was not till I reached the east terrace that 
I saw anything. Then, the moon shining 
bright, I saw something like a shadow flitting 
before me, as it were, at some distance. I 
stopped, when I turned the comer of the cast 
tower, where I had seen this figure not a 
moment before, — but it was gone ! As I stood 
looking through the old arch which leads to 
the east rampart, and where I am sure it had 
passed, I heard, all of a sudden, such a sound ! 
— It was not like a groan, or a cry, or a 
f.hout, or anything I ever heard in my life. 
1 heard it only once, and that was enough 
for me ; for I know nothing that happened 
after, till I found my comrades here about 
me.' 

* Come,' said Sebastian, ' let us go to our 
posts — the moon is setting. Good-night, 
lady !' 

' Aye, let us go,' rejoined Rgbgrto. ' Good- 
pi;^l)t, lad)r/ 



' Good-night : the Holy Mother guard 
you r said Emily, as she closed her casement, 
and retired to reflect upon the strange circum- 
stance that had just occurred, connecting 
which with what had happened on former 
nights, she endeavoured to derive from the 
whole something more positive than conjec- 
ture. But her imagination was inflamed, 
while her judgment was not enlightened, and 
the terrors of superstition again pervaded her 
mind. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

'There is one within. 
Beside the things that we have heard and seen, 
Recounts most horrid sights seen by the watch.' 

Julius Caesar. 

In the morning Emily found Madame Mon- 
toni nearly in the same condition as on the 
preceding night ; she had slept httle, and 
that little had not refreshed her ; she smiled 
on her niece, and seemed cheered by her pre- 
sence, but spoke only a few words, and never 
named Montoni, who, however, soon after 
entered the room. His wife, when she under- 
stood that he was there, appeared much 
agitated, but was entirely silent, till Emily 
rose from a chair at the bedside, when she 
begged in a feeble voice that she would not 
leave her. 

The visit of Montoni was not to soothe his 
wife, whom he knew to be dying, or to con- 
sole or to ask her forgiveness, but to make a 
last effort to procure that signature which 
would transfer her estates in Languedoc, 
after her death to him rather than to Emily. 
This was a scene that exhibited on his part 
his usual inliumanity, and on that of Madame 
Montoni, a persevering spirit contending with 
a feeble frame ; while Emily repeatedly de- 
clared to him her willingness to resig^ all 
claim to those estates, rather than that the last 
hours of her aunt should be disturbed by con- 
tention. Montoni, however, did not leave 
the room till his wife, exhausted by tlie ob- 
stinate dispute, had fainted ; and she lay so 
long insensible that Emily began to fear that 
the spark of life was extinguished. At length 
she revived ; and looking feebly up at her 
niece, whose tears were falling over her, made 
an effort to speak ; but her words were unin- 
telligible, and Emily again apprehended she 
was dying. Afterwards, however, she re- 
covered her speech, and, being somewhat 
restored by a cordial, conversed for a con- 
siderable time on the subject of her estates in 
France with clearness and precision. She 
directed her niece where to find some papers 
relative to them, which she had hitherto con- 
cealed from the search of Montoni, and ear- 
nestly charged her never to suflcr these papers 
p escape t\cr. " 



• 



S3 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



Soon after this conversation Madame Mon- 
toni sunk into a doze, and continued slumber- 
ing till evening, when she seemed better than 
she had been since her removal from the 
turret. Emily never left her for a moment 
till long after midnight, and even then would 
not have quitted the room, had not her aunt 
entreated that she would retire to rest. She 
then obeyed the more willingly, because her 
patient appeared somewhat recruited by 
sleep ; and giving Annette the same injunc- 
tion as on the preceding night, she withdrew 
to her own apartment. But her spirits were 
wakeful and agitated ; and finding it impos- 
sible to sleep, she determined to watch once 
more for the mysterious appearance that had 
so much interested and alarmed her. 

It was now the second watch of the night ; 
and about the time when the figure had 
before appeared, Emily heard the passing 
footsteps of the sentinels on the rampart, as 
they changed guard ; and when all was again 
silent, she took her station at the casement, 
leaving her lamp in a remote part of the 
chamber, that she might escape notice from 
without. The moon gave a faint and uncer- 
tain light, for heavy vapours surrounded it, 
and often rolling over the disc, left the scene 
below in total darkness. It was in one of 
these moments of obscurity that she observed 
a small and lambent flame moving at some 
distance on the terrace. While she gazed, it 
disappeared ; and the moon again emerging 
from the lurid and heavy thunder clouds, she 
turned her attention to the heavens, where the 
vivid lightnings darted from cloud to cloud, 
and flashed silently on the woods below. She 
loved to catch in the momentary gleam the 
gloomy landscape. Sometimes a cloud 
opened its light upon a distant mountain ; 
and, while the sudden splendour illumined 
all its recesses of rock and wood, the rest of 
the scene remained in deep shadow ; at others, 
partial features of the castle were revealed by 
the glimpse — the ancient arch leading to the 
east rampart, the turret above, or the fortifi- 
cations beyond ; and then, perhaps, the whole 
edifice, with all its towers, its dark massy 
walls and pointed casements, would appear, 
and vanish in an instant. 

Emily, looking up again on the rampart, per- 
ceived the flame she had seen before ; it 
moved onward ; and soon after she thought 
she heard a footstep. The light appeared and 
disappeared frequently, while, as she watched, 
it glided under her casements, and at the 
same instant she was certain that a footstep 
passed, but the darkness did not permit her 
to distinguish any object except the flame. It 
moved away, and then, by a gleam of light- 
ning, she perceived some person on the ter- 
race. All the anxieties of the preceding night 
returned. This person advanced, and the 
pjnying flame alternately appeared and vaii- 
ishccl Emily wished to speak, to crvd \\5it 



doubts whether this figure were human or 
supernatural ; but her courage failed as often 
as she attempted utterance, till the light 
moved again under the casement, and she 
faintly demanded who passed. 

• A friend,' replied a voice. 

•What friend,' said Emily, somewhat en- 
couraged ; ' who are you, and what is that 
light you carry?* 

' I am Ant'honio, one of the signor's sol- 
diers,' replied the voice. 

' And what is that tapering light you bear?* 
said Emily ; ' see how it starts upwards,— 
and now it vanishes !' 

'This light, lady,' said the soldier, 'has ap- 
peared to-night as you see it, on the point of 
my lance, and ever since I have been on 
watch ; but what it means I cannot tell.' 

' This is very strange,' said Emily. 

' My fellow-guard,' continued the man, 'has 
the same flame on his arms ; he says he has 
sometimes seen it before. I never did ; I am 
but lately come to the castle, for I have not 
been long a soldier. ' 

' How does your comrade account for it 7 
said Emily. 

' He says it is an omen, lady, and bodes no 
good. ' 

'And what harm can it bode?* rejoined 
Emily. 

• He knows not so much as that, lady.' 
Whether Emily was alarmed by this omen, 

or not, she certainly was relieved from much 
terror by discovering this man to be only a 
soldier on duty, and it immediately occurred 
to her that it might be he who had occasioned 
so much alarm on the preceding night. There 
were, however, some circumstances that still 
required explanation. As far as she could 
judge by the faint moon-light that had as- 
sisted her observation, the figure she had seen 
did not resemble this man either in shape or 
size ; besides, she was certain it had carried 
no arms. The silence of its steps, if steps it 
had, the moaning sounds, too, which it had 
uttered, and its strange disappearance, were 
circumstances of mysterious import, that did 
not apply, with probability, to a soldier 
engaged in the duty of his guard. 

She now inquired of the sentinel, whether 
he had seen any person, besides his fellow- 
watch, walking on the terrace about midnight ; 
and then briefly related what she had hersdf 
observed. 

' I was not on guard that night, lady,' 
replied the man, 'but I heard of what hap- 
pened. 'J'here are amongst us who believe 
strange things. Strange stories, too, have 
long been told of this castle, but it is no busi- 
ness of mine to repeat them ; and, for my 
part, I have no reason to complain, our chidF 
does nobly by us.' 

'I commend your prudence,' said Emily. 
'Good-night, and accept this from me,' she 
^.dCici^, \\\to^vcv^ \\\\^ ^ ^TOall ^iece of coin, 



THE MYSTERIES OF ODOLPHO, 



43 



and then closing the casement to put an end 
to the discourse. 

When he was gone, she opened it again, 
listened with a gloomy pleasure to the distant 
thunder that began to murmur among the 
mountains, and watched the arrowy light- 
nings which broke over the remoter scene. 
The pealing thunder rolled onward, and then, 
reverberated by the mountains, other thunder 
seemed to answer from the opposite horizon ; 
while the accumulating clouds entirely con- 
cealing the moon, assumed a red sulphureous 
tinge that foretold a violent storm. 

Emily remained at her casement, till the 
vivid lightning, that now every instant revealed 
the wide horizon and the landscape below, 
made it no longer safe to do so, and she went 
to her couch ; but, unable to compose her 
mind to sleep, still listened in silent awe to 
the tremendous sounds that seemed to shake 
the castle to its foundation. 

She had continued thus for a considerable 
time, when amidst the uproar of the storm 
she thought she heard a voice ; and raising 
herself to listen, saw the chamber door open, 
and Annette enter with a countenance of wild 
affright. 

' She is dying, ma'amselle ; my lady is 
dying 1' said she. 

Emily started up, and ran to Madame 
Montoni's room. When she entered, her 
aunt appeared to have fainted, for she was 
quite still and insensible ; and Emily, with a 
strength of mind that refused to yield to grief 
while any duty required her activity, applied 
every means that seemed likely to restore her. 
But the last struggle was over — she was gone 
for ever. 

When Emily perceived that all her efforts 
were ineffectual, she interrogated the terrified 
Annette, and learned that Madame Montoni 
had fallen into a doze soon after Emily's 
departure, in which she had continued imtil a 
few minutes before her death. 

' I wondered, ma'amselle,' said Annette, 
' what was the reason my lady did not seem 
frightened at the thunder, when I was so 
terrified ; and I went often to the bed to speak 
to her, but she appeared to be asleep ; till 
presently I baard a strange noise, and, going 
to her, saw she was dying.' 

Emily at this recital shed tears. She had 
no doubt but that the violent change in the 
air, which the tempest produced, had effected 
this fatal one on the exhausted frame of 
Madame Montoni. 

After some deliberation she determined that 
Montoni should not be informed of this event 
till the morning ; for she considered that he 
might perhaps utter some inhuman expres- 
sions, such as in the present temper of her 
spirits she could not bear. With Annette 
alone, therefore, whom she encouraged by her 
own example, she performed some of the last 
solemn olhccs for the dead, and compelled 



herself to watch during the night by the body 
of her deceased aunt. During this solemn 
period, rendered more awful by the tremen- 
dous storm that shook the air, she frequently 
addressed herself to Heaven for support and 
protection ; and her pious prayers, we may 
beheve, were accepted of the God that giveth 
comfort. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

' The midnight clock has toU'd ; and hark, the bell 
Of death beats slow ! heard ye the note profound ? 
It pauses now ; and now with rising knell 
Flings to the hollow gale its sullen sound.' 

Mason. 

When Montoni was informed of the death of 
his wife, and considered that she had died 
without giving him the signature so necessary 
to the accomplishment of his wishes, no sense 
of decency restrained the expression of his 
resentment. Emily anxiously avoided his 
presence, and watched during two days and 
two nights, with little intermission, by the 
corpse of her late aunt. Her mind, deeply 
impressed with the unhappy fate of this object, 
she forgot all her faults, her unjust and im- 
perious conduct to herself ; and remembering 
only her sufferings, thought of her only with 
tender compassion. Sometimes, however, she 
could not avoid musing upon the strange in- 
fatuation that had proved so fatal to her aunt, 
and had involved herself in a labyrinth of 
misfortune from which she saw no means of 
escaping, — the marriage with Montoni. But 
when she considered this circumstance, it was 
more in sorrow than in anger, more for the 
purpose of indulging lamentation, than re- 
proach. 

In her pious cares she was not disturbed by 
Montoni, who not only avoided the chamber 
where the remains of his wife were laid, but 
that part of the castle adjoining to it, as if he 
had apprehended a contagion in death. He 
seemed to have given no orders respecting the 
funeral, and Emily began to fear he meant to 
offer a new insult to the memory of Madame 
Montoni ; but from this apprehension she 
was relieved, when, on the evening of the 
second day, Annette informed her that the 
interment was to take place that night. She 
knew that Montoni would not attend ; and it 
was so very grievous to her to think that the 
remains of her unfortunate aunt would pass 
to the grave without one relative or friend to 
pay them the last decent rites, that she deter- 
mined to be deterred by no considerations for 
herself, from observing this duty. She would 
otherwise have shrunk from the circumstance 
of following them to the cold vault, to which 
they were to be carried by men whose air and 
countenances seemed to sAaxco^ ^^swv \53^ 



"4 

:\v\d privacy, which Montoni had chosen for 
commitlinii;, if possible, to oblivion the n'liqiics 
of a woman whom his harsh conduct had at 
least contributcil to destroy. 

Emily, shuddering with emotions of horror 
and grief, assisted by Annette, prepared the 
corpse for interment ; and having wrapt it in 
cerements and covered it with a winding-sheet, 
they watched beside it till past midnight, when 
they heard the approaching footsteps of the 
men who were to lay it in its earthy bed. It 
was with diftkulty that Emily overcame her 
emotion, when the door of the chamber being 
thrown open, their gloomy countenances were 
seen by the glare of the torch they carried, 
and two of them, without speaking, lifted the 
body on their shoulders, while the third, 
preceding them with the hght, descended 
through the castle towards the grave, which 
was in the lower vault of the chapel within 
the castle walls. 

'I'hey had to cross two courts towards the 
east wing of the castle, which, adjoining the 
chapel, was, like it, in ruins ; but the silence 
and gloom of these courts had now little 
power over Emily's mind, occupied as it was 
with more mournful ideas ; and she scarcely 
heard the low and dismal hooting of the night- 
bird that roosted among the ivied battlements 
of the ruin, or perceived the still flittings of 
the bat which frequently crossed her way. 
But when, having entered the chapel and 
passed between the mouldering pillars of the 
aisles, the bearers stopped at a flight of steps 
that led down to a low arched door, and, their 
comrade having descended to unlock it, she 
saw imperfectly the gloomy abyss beyond — 
saw the corpse of her aunt carried dow n these 
steps, and the ruflian-hke figure that stood 
with a torch at the bottom to receive it — all 
her fortitude was lost in emotions of inex- 
pressible grief and terror. JShe turned to lean 
upon Annette, who was cold and trembling 
like herself, and she lingered so long on the 
summit of the flight, that the gleam of the 
torch began to die away on the pillars of the 
chapel, and the men were almost beyond her 
view. Then, the gloom around her awaken- 
ing other fears, and a sense of what she 
considered to be her duty overcoming her 
reluctance, she descended to the vaults, 
following the echo of footsteps and the ftiint 
ray that pierced the darkness, till the harsh 
grating of a distant door, that was opened to 
receive the corpse, again appalled her. 

After the pause of a moment she went on, 
and, as she entered the vaults, saw between 
the arches, at some distance, the men lay 
down the body near the edge of an open 
grave, where stood another of Montoni's 
men, and a priest whom she did not observe 
till he began the burial service ; then lifting 
her eyes from the ground, she saw the vener- 
ab]c figure of the friar, and heard him in a 
low voice, equally .colenm and affccvVivg, p«iT- 



THE MVSTERinS OP VDOLHtO, 



form the ser\ice for the dead. At the moment 
in which tliey let down the body into the 
earth, the scene was such as only the dark 
pencil of a Domcnichino, i^erhaps, coulfl have 
done justice to. The fierce features aAd wild 
dress of the condottieri bending with their 
torches over the grave into which the corpse 
was descending, were contrasted by the 
venerable figure of the monk wrapt in long 
black garments, his cowl thrown back from 
his pale face, on which the light gleaming 
strongly showed the lines of affliction softened 
by piety, and the few gray locks which time 
had spared on his temples : while beside him 
stood the softer form of Emily, who leaned 
for support upon Annette ; her face half 
averted, and shaded by a thin veil that fell 
over her figure ; and her mild and beautiful 
countenance fixed in grief so solemn as ad- 
mitted not of tears, ^hile she thus saw com- 
mitted untimely to the earth her last relative 
and friend. The gleams thrown between the 
arches of the vaults, where, here and there, 
the broken ground marked the spots in which 
other bodies had been recently interred, and 
the general obscurity beyond, were circum- 
stances that alone would have led on the 
imagination of a spectator to scenes more 
horrible than even that which was pictured at 
the grave of the misguided and unfortimate 
Madame Montoni. 

When the service was over, the friar re- 
garded Emily with attention and surprise, and 
looked as if he wished to speak to her, but 
was restrained by the presence of the condot- 
tieri, who, as they now led the way to the 
courts, amused themselves, with jokes upon 
his holy order, which he endured in silence, 
demanding only to be conducted safely to his 
convent, and to which Emily listened with 
concern and even horror. When they reached 
the court, the monk gave her his blessing, and, 
after a lingering look of pity, turned away to 
the portal, whither one of the men carried a 
torch ; while Annette, lighting another, pre- 
ceded Emily to her apartment. The appear- 
ance of the friar, and the expression of tender 
compassion with which he had regarded her, 
had interested Emily, who, though it was at 
her earnest supplication that Montoni had 
consented to allow a priest to perform the 
last rites for his deceased wife, knew notliing 
concerning this person, till Annette now 
informed her that he belonged to a monastery 
situated among the moimtains at a few miles 
distance. The superior, who regarded Mon- 
toni and his associates not only with aversion 
but with terror, had probably feared to offend 
him by refusing his request, and had therefore 
ordered a monk to officiate at the funeral, 
who, with the meek spirit of a Christian, had 
overcome his reluctance to enter the walls of 
such a castle, by the wish of performing what 
he considered to be his duty ; and, as the 
c\\;\Vti\ >tsv\?. bwvk Qu consecrated ground, had 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPIIO. 2$ 

not objected to commit to it the remains of was going to write — when the design of 

the late unhappy Mackimc Montoni. Montoni came upon her mind like a flash of 

Several days passed with Emily in total lightning ; she trembled, let the pen fall, and 

seclusion, and in a state of mind partaking refused to sign what she had not read. Mon- 

both^f terror for herself and grief for the toni affected to laugh at her scruples, and, 

departed. She at length determined to make taking up the paper again, pretended to read ; 

other efforts to persuade Montoni to permit but Emily, who still trembled on perceiving 

her to return to France. Why he should her danger, and was astonished that her own 

wish to detain her, she could scarcely dare to credulity had so nearly betrayed her, posi- 

conjecture ; but it was too certain that he tivcly refused to sign any paper whatever, 

did so, and the absolute refusal he had for- Montoni, for some time, persevered in affect- 

mcrly given to her deparKire allowed her ing to ridicule this refusal ; but when he per- 

little hope that he would now consent to it. ccived by her steady perseverance that she 

But the horror which his presence inspired, understood his design, he changed his manner, 

made her defer from day to day the mention and bade her follow him to another room, 

of this subject ; and at last she was awakened There he told her that he had been willing to 

from her inactivity only by a message from spare himself and her the trouble of useless 

him, desiring her attendance at a certain hour, contest, in an affair where his will was justice, 

She began to hope he meant to resign, now and where she should find it a law ; and^had 

that her aunt was no more, the authority that therefore endeavoured to persuade, rather 

he had usurped over her ; till she recollected than to compel, her to the practice of her 

that the estates, which had occasioned so duty. 

much contention, were now hers ; and she ' I, as the husband of the late Signora 

then feareu Montoni was about to employ Montoni,' he added, 'am the heir of all she 

some stratagem for obtaining them, and that possessed ; the estates, therefore, which she 

he would detain her his prisoner till he sue- refused to me in her life-time, can no longer 

ceeded. This thought, instead of overcoming be withheld, and, for your own sake, I would 

her with despondency, roused all the latent undeceive you respecting a foolish assertion 

powers of her fortitude into action ; and the she once made to you in my hearing — that 

property which she would willingly have these estates would be yours, if she died with- 

resigned to secure the peace of her aunt, she out resigning them to me. She knew at that 

resolved that no common sufferings of her moment she had no power to withhold them 

own should ever compel her to give to Mon- from me after her decease ; and I think you 

toni. For Valancourt's sake also she deter- have more sense than to provoke my resent- 

roined to preserve these estates, since they mcnt by advancing an unjust claim. I am 

v/ould afford that competency by which she not in the habit of flattering, and you will 

hoped to secure the comfort of their future therefore receive as sincere the praise 1 bestow, 

lives. As she thought of this, she indulged when I say that you possess an understanding 

the tenderness as often, and anticipated the superior to that of your sex ; and that you 

delight of that moment when, with affec- have none of those contemptible foibles that 

tionate generosity, she might tell him they frequently mark the female character — such 

were his own. She saw the smile that lighted as avarice and the love of power, which latter 

up his features — the affectionate regard, which makes women delight to contradict and to 

spoke at once his joy and thanks ; and at tease when they cannot conquer. If I under- 

this instant she believed she could brave any stand your disposition and your mind, you 

sufferings which the evil spirit of Montoni hold in sovereign contempt these common 

might be preparing for her. Remembering failings of your sex.' 

then, for the first time since her aunt's death, Montoni paused ; and Emily remained 

the papers relative to the estates in question, silent and expecting ; for she knew him too 

she determined to search for them as soon as well, to believe he would condescend to such 

her interview with Montoni was over. flattery, unless he thought it would promote 

With these resolutions she met him at the his own interest ; and though he had forborne 

appointed time, and waited to hear his inten- to name vanity among the foibles of women, 

tion before she renewed her request. With it was evident that he considered it to be a 

him were Orsino and another officer, and predominant one, since he designed to sacrifice 

both were standing near a table covered with to hers the character and understanding of her 

papers, which he appeared to be examining. whole sex. 

•I sent for you, Pmily,' said Montoni, 'Judging as I do,' resumed Montoni, *I 

raising his head, ' that you might be a witness cannot believe you will oppose where you 

in some business which I am transacting with know you cannot conquer, or indeed, that 

my friend Orsino. All that is required of you you would wish to conquer, or be avaricious 

will be to sign your name to this paper :' he of any property, when you have not justice on 

then took one up, hurried unintelligibly over your side. I think it proper, however, to 

some lines, and, laying it before her on the acquaint you with the alternative. If you have 

table, offered her a pen. She took it, and a just opinion" of ihe svib\^<;xS3^oj?.^^\v^"^x^^=«^ 



26 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



shall be allowed a safe conveyance to France, 
within a short period ; but, if you are so 
uiUiappy as to be misled by the late assertion 
of the signora, you shall remain my prisoner 
tillyou are convinced of your error.' 

Emily calmly said, 

' I am not so ignorant, signor, of the laws 
on this subject, as to be misled by the assertion 
of any person. The law, in the present 
instance, gives me the estates in question, and 
my own hand shall never betray my right' 

*I have been mistaken in my opinion of 
you, it appears,' rejoined Montoni sternly. 

* You speak boldly, and presumptuously, upon 
a subject which you do not understand. For 
once, I am willing to pardon the conceit of 
ignorance ; the weakness of your sex, too, 
from which, it seems, you are not exempt, 
claims some allowance ; but if you persist in 
this strain — ^you have every thing to fear from 
my justice. ' 

' From your justice, signor,' rejoined Emily, 

* I have nothing to fear — I have only to hope. ' 

Montoni looked at her with vexation, and 
seemed considering what to say. ' I find that 
you are weak enough,' he resumed, ' to credit 
the idle assertion I alluded to ! For your own 
sake I lament this ; as to me, it is of little 
consequence. Your credulity can punish only 
yourself; and I must pity the weakness of 
mind which leads you to so much suifering as 
you are compelling me to prepare for you.' 

'You may find, perhaps, signor,' said Emily 
with mild d&gnity, ' that the strength of my 
mind is equal to the justice of my cause ; and 
that I can endure with fortitude, when it is in 
resistance of oppression. ' 

'You speak like a heroine,' said Montoni 
contemptuously; 'we shall see whether you 
can suffer like one. ' 

Emily was silent, and he left the room. 

Recollecting that it was for Valancourt's 
sake she had thus resisted, she now smiled 
complacently upon the threatened sufferings, 
and retired to the spot which her aunt had 
pointed out as the repository of the papers 
relative to the estates, where she found them 
as described ; and, since she knew of no better 
place of concealment than this, returned them 
without examining their contents, being fearful 
of discovery while she should attempt a perusal. 

To her own solitary chamber she once more 
returned, and there thought again of the late 
conversation with Montoni and of the evil 
she might expect from opposition to his will. 
But his power did not appear so terrible to 
her imagination as it was wont to do : a sacred 
pride was in her heart, that taught it to swell 
against the pressure of injustice, and almost 
to glory in the quiet sufferance of ills, in a 
cause which had also the interest of Valancourt 
for its object. For the first time she felt the 
full extent of her own superiority to Montoni, 
and despised the authority which, UU now, she 
bud only feared* 



As she sat musing, a peal of laughter rose 
from the terrace, and on going to the case- 
ment, she saw, with inexpressible surprise, 
three ladies, dressed in the gala habit of 
Venice, walking with several gentlemen below. 
She gazed in an astonishment that maiSe her 
remain at the window, r^;ardless of bdng 
observed, till the group pa^ed under it ; and 
one of the strangers looking up, she poceived 
the features of Signora Livona, with whose 
manners she had been so much charmed the 
day after her arrival at Venice, and who had 
been there introduced at the table of Montoni 
This discovery occasioned her an emotion of 
doubtful joy ; for it was a matter of joy and 
comfort to know that a person of a mind so 
gentle as that of Signora Livona seemed to be 
was near her ; yet there was something so 
extraordinary in her being at this castle, 
circumstanced as it now was, and evidently, 
by the gaiety of her air, with her own consent, 
that a very painful surmise arose concerning 
her character. But the thought was so shock- 
ing to Emily, whose affection the fascinating 
manners of the signora had won, and appeared 
so improbable, when she remembered these 
manners, that she dismissed it almost instantly. 

On Annette's appearance, however, she 
inquired concerning these strangers ; and the 
former was as eager to tell, as Ejnily was to 
learn. 

'They are just come, ma'amselle,' said 
Annette, ' with two signors from Venice, and 
I was glad to see such Christian faces once 
again. But what can they mean by coming 
here? They must surely be stark mad to 
come freely to such a place as this ! Yet they 
do come freely, for they seem merry enough, 
I am sure.' 

' They were taken prisoners, perhaps?' said 
Emily. 

' Taken prisoners !' exclaimed Annette ; 'no, 
indeed, ma'amselle, not they, I remember one 
of them very well at Venice : she came two or 
three times to the signor's, you know, ma'am- 
selle ; and it was said, but I did not believe a 
word of it— it was said that the signor liked 
her better than he should do. " Then why," 
says I, "bring her to my lady?" "Very 
true," said Ludovico ; but he looked as if he 
knew more too.' 

Emily desired Annette would endeavour to 
learn who these ladies were, as well as all she 
could concerning them ; and she then changed 
the subject, and spoke of distant France. 

'Ah, ma'amselle! we shall never see it 
more !' said Annette, almost weeping. — ' I 
must come on my travels, forsooth !' 

Emily tried to soothe and to cheer her, with 
a hope in which she scarcely herself indulged. 

' How — how, ma'amselle, could you leave 
France, and leave Mons. Valancourt, too? 
said Annette, sobbing. 'I — I — am sure, if 
Ludovico had been in France, I would never 



I 



THE MYSTERIBS OF UDOLPHO. 



^ 



' Why do you lament quitting France, 
then?' said Emily, trying to smile ; 'since, if 
you had remained there, you would not have 
found Ludovico?' 

' Ahyna'amselle ! I only wish I was out of 
this fri^tful castle, serving you in France, and 
I would care about nothing else !' 

' Thank yqu, my good Annette, for your 
affectionate regard : the time will come, I 
hope, when you may remember the expression 
of that wish with pleasure. ' 

Annette departed on her business; and 
Emily sought to lose the sense of her own 
cares, in the visionary scenes of the poet ; but 
she had again to lament the irresistible force 
of circumstances over the taste and powers of 
the mind ; and that it requires a spirit at ease, 
to be sensible even to the abstract pleasures of 
pure intellect. The enthusiasm of genius, with 
all its pictured scenes, now appeared cold and 
dim. As she mused upon the book before 
her, she involuntarily exclaimed, ' Are these, 
indeed, the passages that have so often given 
me exquisite delight ? Where did the charm 
exist ? — Was it in my mind, or in the imagi- 
nation of the poet? It lived in each,' said 
she, pausing. ' But the fire of the poet is in 
vain, if the mind of his reader is not tempered 
like his own, however it may be inferior to his 
in power.' 

Emily would have pursued this train of 
thinking, because it relieved her from more 
painful reflection ; but she found again, that 
. thought cannot always be controlled by will, 
and hers returned to the consideration of her 
own situation. 
In the evening, not choosing to venture 
' down to the ramparts, where she would be 
exposed to the rude gaze of Montoni's asso- 
ciates, she walked for air in the gallery adjoin- 
' ing her chamber ; on reaching the further end 
of which she heard distant sounds of merriment 
' and laughter. It was the wild uproar of riot, 
I not the cheering gaiety of tempered mirth ; 
I and seemed to come from that part of the 
castle where Montoni usually was. Such 
sounds at this time, when her aunt had been 
so few days dead, particularly shocked her, 
consistent as they were with the late conduct 
of Montoni. 

As she listened, .she thought she distin- 
guished female voices mingling with the 
laughter, and this confirmed her worst sur- 
mise concerning the character of Signora 
Livona and her companions. It was evident 
that they had not been brought hither by com- 
pulsion ; and she beheld herself in the remote 
wilds of the Apennine, surrounded by men 
whom she considered to be little less than 
ruffians, and their worst associates, amid 
scenes of vice from which her soul recoiled 
in horror. It was at this moment, when 
the scenes of the present and the future 
opened to her imagination, that the image of 
Valancourt failed in its influence, and her 



resolution shook with dread. She thought 
she understood all the horrors which Montoni 
was preparing for her, and shrunk from an 
encounter with such remorseless vengeance as 
he could inflict. The disputed estates she 
now almost determined to yield at once, 
whenever he should again call upon her, that 
she might regain safety and freedom ; but 
then, the remembrance of Valancourt would 
steal to her heart, and plunge her into the 
distractions of doubt. 

She continued walking in the gallery till 
evening threw its melancholy twilight through 
the painted casements, and deepened the 
gloom of the oak wainscoting around her; 
while the distant perspective of the corridor 
was so much obscured, as to be discernible 
only by the glimmering window that ter- 
minated it. 

Along the vaulted halls and passages below, 
peals of laughter echoed faintiy, at intervals, 
to this remote part of the castle, and seemed 
to render the succeeding stillness more dreary. 
Emily, however, unwilling to return to her 
more forlorn chamber, whither Annette was 
not yet come, still paced the gallery. As she 
passed the door of the apartment, where she 
had once dared to lift the veil which dis- 
covered to her a spectacle so horrible, that she 
had never after remembered it but with emo- 
tions of indescribable awe, this remembrance 
suddenly recurred. It now brought with it reflec- 
tions more terrible than it had yet done, which 
the late conduct of Montoni occasioned ; and 
hastening to quit the gallery while she had 
power to do so, she heard a sudden step be- 
hind her. It might be that of Annette ; but 
turning fearfully to look, she saw through the 
gloom a tall figure following her, and all the 
horrors of that chamber rushed upon her 
mind. In the next moment she found herself 
clasped in the arms of some person, and 
heard a deep voice murmur in her ear. 

When she had power to speak, or to dis- 
tinguish articulated sounds, she demanded who 
detained her. 

' It is I,' replied the voice — ' Why are you 
thus alarmed?' 

She looked on the face of the person who 
spoke ; but the feeble light that gleamed 
through the high casement at the end of the 
gallery, did not permit her to distinguish the 
features. 

'Whoever you are,' said Emily in a 
trembling voice, 'for Heaven's sake let me 
go!' 

' My charming Emily,' said the man, ' why 
will you shut yourself up in this obscure 
place, when there is so much gaiety below? 
Return with me to the cedar parlovir, where 
you will be the fairest ornament of the party ; 
—you shall not repent the exchange.' 

Emily disdained to reply, and still endea- 
voured to liberate herself. 

' Promise that you will come,' he continMAdx 



J*] THE MvsjiiRi/is or uDor.Piio. 

• v\ 1 V. ■' !■.■:. i-'^ \r.y\ in.i-..n(li;Ucly ; l.iit fiFbt on licr dark and dcsolaie couch, ftnd batl.rd 

,'M\<- ii ■• a iLWiin! 1('t M) ddiriR.' ' the pillow with innocent tears. She thought 

■ Who riioyou?" (Uniniuli.-d Kinily, in a lone of her drceascd parents and then of the ab- 

f'f niin.i^'kd tirror and indif:PkUi<)n, while .^hc sent \'alancourt, and frequently called upon 

Mill «tni':i;le(l f«ir lilu rtv— ' wlio are you, that their names ; for the profound stillness that 

liMVi- the in:- -ty tlm-; t«» insult me?' ' now reigned was propitious to the musics 

•Why call me ernel?' s-id the wr.n\ 'I sorrow of her mind, 

would remove you from this dreaiy solitude While she thus remained, her car suddenly 

to a merry party below. Uo you not know caught the notes of distant music, to which 

me?' Fhe listened attendvely ; and soon perceiving 

lilmily now faintly remembered that he was this to be the instrument she had formerly 

one of the oflu.'is who were with Montoni heard at midnight, she rose, and stepped 

when she attended him in the morning. — ' I softly to the casement, to which the sounds 

thank you for the kindness of your intention,' appeared to come from a lower room, 

she replied, without ai^ix'aring' to understand In a few moments their soft melody was 

him, ' but I wish for nothing so much as that accompanied by a voice so full of pathos, that 

you would leave me. ' it evidently ; ang not of imaginarj- sorrows. Its 

' Charming Kmily !' said he, 'give up this sweet and peculiar tones she thought she had 

foolish whim for solitude, and come with me somewhere heard before ; yet, if this was net 

to the company, and ecli])~e the beauties wl^o fancy,itwas,atmost, a ver\' faint recollection. It 

make part of it ; you, only, are wordiy of my stole over her mind, amidst the anguish of her 

love.' Ho attempted to kiss her hand ; but present suftering, like a celestial strain, sooth- 

the strong impulse of her indignaton gave in?:, '"-nd reassuring her: — 'Pleasant as the 

her power to liberate her.'ielf, ar.d she lied to- gale of spring, that sighs on the hunter's ear 

wards the chamber. She closed the door be- when he awakens from dreams of joy, and b*as 

fore he reached it ; having secun^d which, she heard the music of the spirits of the hill.'* 

sunk in a chair, overcome by terror and by But her emotion can scarcely- be imagined, 

the exertion she had made, while she heard when she heard sung, with the taste and sim- 

liis voice and his attempts to open the door, plicity of true feeling, one of the popular airs 

without having the power to raise herself. At of her native province, to which she had so 

length, she perceived him (ie]\nrt, and had re- often listened with delight when a child, and 

maineil listening f«>ra considerable time.and was which she had so often heard her father 

.somewhat revived by not hearing any sound, repeat ! to this well-known song, never, till 

when suddenly she remembered the door of now, heard but in her native country, her 

the private staircase, and that he might enter heart melted, while the memory of past times 

that way, since it was fastened only on the returned. The pleasant, peaceful scenes of 

tUhor side. She then employed herself in en- Ga-cony, the tendc.-mcss and goodness of her 

d'.avouring to secure it in the manner sht» had parent'^, the taste ainl simplicity of her fomv,T 

formerly done. It aj-ipeared to her, that Mon- life — all rose to her fancy, and' formed a pic- 

toni hail alreaiiy e> mmenced hi^ seluMve of ture so sweet and glowing, so strikingly con- 

vens^oance, by withdi-awing from hor his ]>ro- trasted with the scenes, the characters, and 

teetion, and she repented of the rashness that the dangers, which now surrounded her — that 

macle her brave the power of such a man. To her mind could not h.^ar to pause upon the 

retain the estates seemed to be now ullorly relro-pect. and shrunk at the acuteness of its 

imjio^sible ; and to preserve her life, pcrhai:)'s own sufferings. 

her honour, she resolved, if she should e.--e:'ne Hur si.dis wore r:e?p and c.-^n\-ul5ed : .=--e 

the horrors of Uiis night, to give uj) all clnis'.is could no longer li.^ten 'to the str;-.iii that h.Kl 

to the e<i.iios on tlio niorrov.-. pre- idc.l so of :en charmed h.r to tranquillity, and s/.o 

^Iontoni would sufl'er hjr to depart iVcm \\idi<lrc-.v from th^ casement to a remote pr.ri 

IMolplio. of tlie c:..^.:ni).^r. But she was not yet bevond 

When she had come to this t'.-oi-j-n. hor the reich of the mu<:c ; she he-ard the men- 
mind became moro comno>^:'.. \\\ \\.\: -:.- si; "e c:.. in ::.\ and ihc* succeeding air c.iuc-.l"h-.r 
still anxiously lisier.ed. and often sMit!' -.1 :;t r- i^-.v.w to t::e v. iiiiow, for she immed'ateiv r'> 
ideal soun.ls ilMt ap;?e.ired to issue from tho cliccL-.-d it to he the same she had fom'ierfv 
staircase. ^ hc-rd in the ll?:.ing-house in Gascony." 

" ' ~ '" ' ' ' -' - ^^^ 

had 
the 

ivs lo ih.o o-ause of this u au ual absence. ' I: .r. ivy:, .axt ur. -cccuniabie th- "'Jirc\^ V^^ce 

iMudv often stole to t::: st.iirca.^e-door to appeared, that thi. v as the same voice she had 

^>tcn u any step arMr.Mched. but s:iii v. . then !:.:aal. Sur-r^e soon v'eldwS" t^ mh« 

Sk i^'''"'^^^" • ^^''^'"'■^"^°- ^'^•^■^^■^■- emotions; a iI:o.: :hL d;irted' Uke li-hm"^ 

*»atch dunnif the night, she once more r..s:ea -Ossan A.5htn.-s 




fHE MYSTBRIE^ OP UDOLPII6. 



29 



tlpon lier mind, which discovered a train of 
hopes that revived all her spirits. Yet these 
hopes were so new, so unexpected, so aston- 
ishing, that she did not dare to trust, though 
she could not resolve to discourage them. 
She sat down by the casement, breathless, and 
overcome with the alternate emotions of hope 
and fear : then rose again, leaned from the 
window, that she might catch a nearer sound, 
listened, now doubting and then believing, 
softly exclaimed the name of Valancourt, and 
then sunk again into the chair. Yes, it was 
possible that Valancourt was near her, and 
she recollected circumstances that induced 
her to believe it was his voice she had just 
heard. She remembered he had more 
than once said that the fishing-house, where 
she had formerly listened to this voice and air, 
and where she had seen pencilled sonnets ad- 
dressed to herself, had been his favourite 
haunt before he had been made known to her ; 
there, too, she had herself unexpectedly met 
him. It appeared, from these circumstances, 
more than probable that he was the musician 
who had formerly charmed her attention, and 
the author of the lines which had expressed 
such tender admiration ; who else, indeed, 
could it be ? She was unable, at that time, to 
form a conjectiu-e as to the writer ; but since 
her acquaintance with Valancourt, whenever 
he had mentioned the fishing-house to have 
been known to him, she had not scru- 
pled to believe that he was the author of the 
sonnets. 

As these considerations passed over her 
mind, joy, fear, and tenderness contended at 
her heart ; she Ic aned again from the case- 
ment, to catch the sounds which might con- 
firm or destroy her hope, though she did not 
recollect to have ever heard him sing : but the 
voice and the instrument now ceased. 

She considered for a moment whether she 
should venture to speak : then, not choosing, 
lest it should be he, to mention his name, and 
yet too much interested to neglect the oppor- 
tunity of inquiring, she called from the case- 
ment, ' Is that song from Gascony ?' Her 
anxious attention was not cheered by any 
reply ; everything remained silent. Her im- 
patience increasing with herfears, she repeated 
the question ; but still no sound was heard, 
except the sighing of the wind among the 
battlements above ; and she endeavoured to 
console herself with a belief that the stranger, 
whoever he was, had retired, before she had 
spoken, beyond the reach of her voice, which, 
it appeared certain, had Valancourt heard 
and recognised, he would instantly have re- 
plied to. Presently, however, she considered 
that a motive of prudence, and not an acci- 
dental removal, might occasion his silence : 
but the surmise that led to this reflection, 
suddenly changed her hope and joy to terror 
and grief; for, if Valancourt were in the 
castle, it was too probable that he was here a 



prisoner, taken with some of liis court irjnicn, 
many of whom were at that time engaged in 
the wars of Italy, or intercepted in some at- 
tempt to reach her. Had he even recollected 
Emily's voice, he would have feared, in these 
circumstances, to reply to it in the presence of 
the men who guarded his prison. 

What so lately she had eagerly hoped, she 
now believed she dreaded : — dreaded to know 
that Valancourt was near her ; and while she 
was anxious to be relieved from her appre- 
hension for his safety, she still was uncon- 
scious that a hope of soon seeing him 
struggled with the fear. 

She remained listening at the casement till 
the air began to freshen, and one high moun- 
tain in the east to glimmer with the morning ; 
when, wearied with anxiety, she retired to her 
couch, where she found it utterly impossible 
to sleep ; for joy, tenderness, doubt, and ap- 
prehension, distracted her during the whole 
night. Now she rose from the couch, and 
opened the casement to listen ; then she 
would pace the room with impatient steps, 
and at length return with despondence to her 
pillow. Never did hours appear to move so 
heavily, as those of this anxious night ; after 
which she hoped that Annette might appear, 
and conclude her present state of torturing 
suspense. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

Might we but hear 

The folded flocks penn'd in their wattled cotes, 
Or sound of pastoral reed with oaten stops. 
Or whistle from the lodge, or village cock 
Count the night watches to his feathery dames, 
'Twould be some solace yet, some little cheering 
In this close dungeon of innumerous boughs.' 

Milton. 

In the morning Emily was relieved from her 
fears for Annette, who came at an early hour. 

' Here were fine doings in the castle last 
night, ma'amselle,' said she, as soon as she 
entered the room, — ' fine doings, indeed ! 
Was you not frightened, ma'amselle, at not 
seeing me ?' 

' I was alarmed both on your account and 
on my own,' replied Emily.—' What detained 
you?' 

' Aye, I said so, I told him so ; but it 
would not do. It was not my fault, indeed, 
ma'amselle, for I could not get out. That 
rogue Ludovico locked me up again.' 

' Locked you up !' said Emily, with dis- 
pleasure. • Why do you permit Ludovico to 
lock you up ?' 

' Holy Saints !' exclaimed Annette, ' How 
can I help it! If he will lock the door, 
ma'amselle, and take away the key, how am 
I to get out, unless I jump through the 
window? But that I should not mind so 
much, if the casements here were not 0.IL ^:j^ 



3 J THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

high ; one can hardly scramble up to them need hide yourself : come forth, my valorous 

on the inside, and one should break one's Signor Steward I" Just then old Carlo opened 

neck, I sup]>osc, going down on the out<;ide. his door, and he came with a flask in his 

But you know, I daresay, ma'am, what a hand ; for as soon as the signor saw him, he 

hurly-burly the castle was in last night ; you was as tame as could be, and followed him 

must have heard some of tlie uproar.' away as naturally as a dog does a butcher with 

' What, were they disputing, then?* said a piece of meat in his basket. All this I saw 

Kmilv. through the key-hole. "Well, Annette," said 

•N*o, ma'amscllc, not fighting, but almost Ludovico jeeringly, "shall I let you out now 7* 

as good, for I believe there was not one of "O no," says I, " I would not " * 

the signors sober ; and what is more, not ' I have some (questions to ask you on 

one of those fine ladies sober, either. I another subject,' mterrupted Emily, quite 

thought, when I saw them first, that all those wearied by this story. ' Do you know whether 

fine silks and fine veils, — why ma'amselle, there are any prisoners in the castle, and 

their veils were worked with silver ! and fine whether they are confined at this end of the 

trimmings boded no good 1 guessed edifice?' 

what they were I' 'I was not in the way, ma'amselle,' replied 

• Good God I' exclaimed Emily, ' what will Annette, 'when the first party came in from 
become of me ?' the mountains, and the last party is not come 

'Aye, ma'am, Ludovico said much the back yet, so I don't knowwhether there are any 

same thing of me. " Good God 1" 3aid he, prisoners ; but it is expected back to-night, or 

"Annette, what is to become of you, if you to-morrow, and I shall know then, perhaps.' 

are to go running about the castle among all Emily inquired if she had ever heard the 

these drunken signors ?" " O I" says I, " for servants talk of prisoners, 

that matter, I only want to go to my young ' Ah, ma'amselle I' said Annette archly, 

lady's chamber, and I have only to go, you ' now, I daresay you are thinkine^ of Mon- 

know, along the vaulted passage and across sieur Valancourt, and that he may nave come 

the great hall and up the marble staircase and among the armies, which, they say, are come 

along the north gallery and through the west from our country, to fight against this state, 

wing of the castle, and I am in the corridor and that he has met with some of our people, 

in a minute." "Are you so?" says he; and is taken captive. O Lord! how glad I 

• ' and what is to become of you if you meet should be, if it was so I' 

any of those noble cavaliers in the way?" 'Would you, indeed, be glad ?* said Emilf 

"Well," says I, "if you think there is danger in a tone of mournful reproach, 

then, go with me, and guard me ; I am never 'To be sure I should, ma'am,' replied 

afraid when you are by." "What I" says he, Annette ; 'and would you not be glad, too, 

' ' when I am scarcely recovered of one wound, to see Signor Valancourt ? I don't know any 

shall I put myself in the way of getting an- chevalier I like better, I have a very great 

other? for if any of the cavaliers meet you, regard for the signor, truly.' 

tliey will fall a-fighting with me directly. No, ' Your regard for him cannot be doubted.' 

no," says he, "I will cut the way shorter, said Emily, 'since you wish to see him a 

than through the vaulted passage, and up the prisoner.' 

marble staircase, and along the north gallery, 'Why no, ma'amselle, not a prisoner either ; 

and through the west wing of the castle, for but one must be glad to see him you know, 

you shall stay here, Annette ; you shall not And it was only the other night I dreamt — I 

fo out of this room to-night. " So with that, saw him drive into the castle-yard all in a 

says ' coach and six, and dressed out, with a laced 

• Well, well,' said Emily impatiently, and coat and a sword, like a lord as he is.' 
anxious to inquire on another subject—' so he Emily could not forbear smiling at Annette's 
locked you up ?' ideas of Valancourt, and repeated her inquiry, 

' Yes, he did, indeed, ma'amselle, notwith- whether she had heard the servants talk of 

standing all I could say to the contrary ; and prisoners. 

Caterina and I and he stayed there all night. ' No, ma'amselle,' replied she, ' never ; and 

And in a few minutes after 1 was not so vexed, lately they have done nothing but talk of the 

for there came Signor Verezzi roaring along apparition that has been walking about of a 

the passage like a mad bull, and he mistook night on the ramparts, and that frightened 

Ludovico's hall for old Carlo's ; so he tried to the sentinels into fits. It came among them 

burst open the door, and called out for more like a flash of fire, they say, and they all fell 

wine, for that he had drunk all the flasks dry, down in a row, till they came to themselves 

and was dying of thirst. So we were all as again ; and then it was gone, and nothing to 

stillasnight, that he might suppose there was be seen but the old castle walls; so they 

nobody in the room ; but the signor was as helped one another up again as fast as they 

cimningasthebest of us, and kept calling out could. You would not believe, ma'amselle, 

at the door. " Come forth, my ancient hero I' though I showed you the very cannon where 

;>aid be ' ' here is no enemy at the gate, that you it used to appear. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 31 

And are you, indeed, so simple, Annette,' people saw my lady notice her, they thought 

said Emily, smiling at this curious exaggera- what they had' heard must be scandal. The 

tion of the circimistances she had witnessed, other two are the mistresses of Signor Ve- 

* as to credit these stories ?' rezzi and Signor Bertolini ; and Signor Mon- 

' Credit them, ma'amselle ! why all the toni invited them all to the castle ; and so, 
world could not persuade me out of them, yesterday, he gave a great entertainment ; and 
Roberto and Sebastian, and half a dozen there they were, all drinking Tuscany wine 
more of them went into fits ! To be sure and all sorts, and laughing and singing, till 
there was no occasion for that ; I said my- they made the castle ring again. But I 
self there was no need of that, for says I, thought they were dismal sounds, so soon 
when the enemy comes, what a pretty figure after my poor lady's death too ; and they 
they will cut, if they are to fall down in fits, brought to my mind what she would have 
all of a row ! The enemy won't be so civil, thought, if she had heard them — "but she can- 
perhaps, as to walk off like the ghost, and not hear them now, poor soul !" said I.' 
leave them to help one another up, but will Emily turned away to conceal her emotion, 
fall to, cutting and slashing, till he makes and then desired Annette to go and make 
them all rise up dead men. No, no, says I, inquiry concerning the prisoners that might be 
there is reason in all things ; though I might in the castle, but conjured her to do it with 
have fallen down in a fit, that was no rule for caution, and on no account to mention her 
them being, because it was no business of name, or that of Monsieur Valancourt. 
mine to look gruff and fight battles. ' Now I think of it, ma'amselle,' said 

Emily endeavoured to correct the supersti- Annette, ' I do believe there are prisoners, 
tious weakness of Annette, though she could for I overheard one of the signor's men, 
not entirely subdue her own ; to which the yesterday, in the servants' hall, talking some- 
latter only replied, ' Nay, ma'amselle, you will thing about ransoms, and saying what a fine 
believe nothing ; you are almost as bad as the thing it was for his Excellenza to catch up 
signor himself, who was in a great passion men, and they were as good booty as any 
when they told him of what had happened, other, because of the ransoms. And the 
and swore that the first man who repeated other man was grumbling, and saying it was 
such nonsense should be thrown into the dun- fine enough for the signor, but none so fine 
geon under the east turret. This was a hard for his soldiers, "because," said he, " we don't 
punishment, too, for only talking nonsense, as go shares there." ' 

he called it ; but I daresay he had other This information heightened Emily's im- 

reasons for calling it so, than you have, patience to know more, and Annette imme- 

ma'am.' diately departed on her inquiry. 

Emily looked displeased, and made no The late resolution of EmUy to resign her 
reply. As she mused upon the recollected estates to Montoni, now gave way to new con- 
appearance, which had lately so much alarmed siderations ; the possibility that Valancoiut 
her, and considered the circumstances of the was near her, revived her fortitude, and she 
figure having stationed itself opposite to her determined to brave the threatened vengeance, 
casement, she was for a moment inclined to at least, till she could be assured whether 
believe it was Valancourt whom she had seen, he was really in the castle. She was in this 
Yet, if it was he, why did he not speak to her, temper of mind, when she received a message 
when he had the opportunity of doing so — from Montoni, requiring her attendance in 
and, if he was a prisoner in the castle, and the cedar parlour, which she obeyed with 
he could be here in no other character, how trembling, and on her way thither endea- 
could he obtain the means of walking abroad voured to animate her fortitude with the idea 
on the rampart ? Thus she was utterly unable of Valancourt. 

to decide, whether the musician and the form Montoni was alone. ' I sent for you,' said 
she had observed were the same, or, if they he, ' to give you another opportunity of re- 
were, whether this was Valancourt. She, tracting your late mistaken assertions con- 
however, desired that Annette would endea- ceming the Languedoc estates. I will con- 
vour to learn whether any prisoners were in descend to advise where I may command. — 
the castle, and also their names. If you are really deluded by an opinion that 

' O dear, ma'amselle !' said Annette, ' I you have any right to these estates, at least 

forgot to tell you what you bade me ask do not persist in the error — an error which 

about — the ladies, as they call themselves, you may perceive, too late, has been fatal to 

who are lately come to Udolpho. Why that you. Dare my resentment no further, but 

Signora Livona, that the signor brought to sign the papers.' 

see my late lady at Venice, is his mistress now, 'If I have no right in these estates, sir,' 

and was little better then, I dare say. And said Emily, ' of what service can it be to you, 

Ludovico says (but pray be secret, ma'am) that I should sign any papers concerning 

that his Excellenza introduced her only to them? If the lands are yours by law, you 

impose upon the world, that had begun to certainly may possess them without my int^r- 

make free with her character, So when ference or my consent. * 



32 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



• I will l.nvc no more argument,' said Mon- 
toni, with a look that made her tremble. 
' \\ hilt had I but trouble to expect, when I 
condescended to reason with a baby ! But I 
will be trifled with no longer : let the recol- 
lection of your aunt's sufferings, in consequence 
of her folly and obstinacy, teach you a lesson. 
— Sign the papers.' 

Emily's resolution was for a moment awed : 
— she shrunk at the recollections he revived, 
and from the vengeance he threatened ; but 
then, the image of Valancoiut, who so long 
had loved her, and who was now, perhaps, so 
near her, came to her heart, and, together with 
the strong feelings of indignation, with which 
she had always from her infancy regarded an 
act of injustice, inspired her with a noble, 
though imprudent courage. 

' Sign the papers,' said Montoni, more im- 
patiently than before. 

' Never, sir,* replied Emily, • that request 
would have proved to me the injustice of 
your claim, had I even been ignorant of my 
right.' 

Montoni turned pale with anger, while his 
quivering lip and lurking eye made her almost 
repent the boldness of her speech. 

' Then all my vengeance falls upon you,' he 
exclaimed with a horrible oath. ' And think 
not it shall be delayed. Neither the estates in 
Languedoc nor Gascony shall be yours ; you 
have dared to question my right — now dare to 
question my power. I have a punishment 
which you think not of : it is terrible ! This 
night — this very night ' 

' This night !' repeated another voice. 

Montoni paused, and turned half round ; 
but, seeming to recollect himself, he proceeded 
in a lower tone. 

' You have lately seen one terrible example 
of obstinacy and folly ; yet this, it appears, has 
not been sufficient to deter you. — I could tell 

you of others 1 could make you tremble at 

the bare recital. ' 

He was interrupted by a groan, which 
seemed to rise from underneath the chamber 
they were in ; and, as he threw a glance 
round it, impatience and rage flashed from 
his eyes, yet something like a shade of fear 
passed over his countenance. Emily sat down 
in a chair near the door, for the various emo- 
tions she had suffered now almost overcame 
her ; but Montoni paused scarcely an instant, 
and, commanding his features, resumed his 
discourse in a lower, yet sterner voice. 

' I say, I could give you other instances of 
my power and of my character, which it seems 
you do not understand, or you would not 
defy me. — I could tell you, that when once 

my resolution is taken. But I am talking to 

a baby. Let me, however, repeat, that ter- 
rible as are the examples I could recite, the 
recital could not now benefit you : for, though 
your repentance would put an immediate end 
to opposition, it would not now appease my 



indignation — I will have vengeance as well as 
justice.' 

Another groan filled the pause which Mon- 
toni made. 

' Leave the room instantly !' said he, seem- 
ing not to notice this strange occurrenoe. 
Without power to implore his pity, she rose 
to go, but found that she could not support 
herself; awe and terror overcame her, and 
she sunk again into the chair. 

• Quit my presence i' cried Montoni 'Thii 
affectation of fear ill becomes the heroine who 
has just dared to brave my indignation.' 

' Did you hear nothing,' signor?* said Emily 
trembling, and still unable to leave the 
room. 

' I heard my own voice,' rejoined Montoni 
sternly. 

' And nothing else ?' said Emily, speaking 
with difficulty. — ' There again ! 60 you hear 
nothing now ?' 

' Obey my order,' repeated MontonL 'And 
for these fool's tricks — I will soon discover 
by whom they are practised.* 

Emily again rose, and exerted herself to the 
utmost to leave the room, while Montoni 
followed her ; but instead of calling aloud to 
his servants to search the chamber, as he had 
formerly done on a similar occurrence, passed 
to the ramparts. 

As in her way to the corridor she rested for 
a moment at an open casement, Emily saw a 
party of Montoni's troops winding down a 
distant mountain, whom she noticed no further 
than as they brought to her mind the wretched 
prisoners they were perhaps bringing to the 
castle. At length having reached her apart- 
ment, she threw herself upon the couch, over- 
come with the new horrors of her situation. 
Her thoughts lost in tumult and perplexity, 
she could neither repent of nor approve her late 
conduct ; she could only remember that she 
was in the power of a man who had no prin- 
ciple of action — but his will : and the astonish- 
ment and terrors of superstition, which had 
for a moment so strongly assailed her, now 
yielded to those of reason. 

She was at length roused from the reverie 
which engaged her, by a confusion of distant 
voices, and a clattering of hoofs, that seemed 
to come on the wind, from tlie courts. A 
sudden hope that some good was approach- 
ing seized her mind, till she remembered the 
troops she had observed from the casement, 
and concluded this to be the party which 
Annette had said were expected at Udolpho. 

Soon after, she heard voices faintly from the 
halls, and the noise of horses' feet sunk away 
in the wind ; silence ensued. Emily listened 
an.xiously for Annette's step in the corridor; 
but a pause of total stillness continued, till 
again the castle seemed to be all tumult and 
confusion. She heard the echoes of many 
footsteps passing to and fro in the halls and 
avenues below, and then busy tongues wero 






THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 33 

loud on the rampart. Having hurried to her whom it suddenly occurred that Ludovico 

casement, she perceived Montoni with some might be of some service, if there should be a 

of his officers leaning on the walls, and point- possibility of escape, and who repeated the 

ing from them ; while several soldiers were substance of what had passed between Mon- 

employed at the further end of the rampart toni and herself, but conjured her to mention 

about some cannon; and she continued to this to no person except to Ludovico. * It may 

observe them, careless of the passing time. perhaps be in his power,' she added, *to 

Annette at length appeared, but brought no effect our escape. Go to him, Annette, tdl 

intelligence of Valancourt ; 'for, ma'amselle,' him what I have to apprehend, and what I 

said she, • all the people pretend to know have already suffered ; but entreat him to be 

nothing about any prisoners. But here is a secret, and to lose no time in attempting to 

fine piece of business ! The rest of the party release us. If he is willing to undertake this, 

are just arrived, ma'am ; they came scamper- he shall be amply rewarded. I cannot speak 

ing in, as if they would have broken their with him myself, for we might be observed, 

necks ; one scarcely knew whether the man or and then effectual care would be taken to 

his horse would get within the gates first, prevent our flight. But be quick, Annette, and, 

And they have brought word — and such news ! above all, be discreet— I will await your re- 

they have brought word that a party of the tiun in this apartment ' 

enemy, as they call them, are coming towards The girl, whose honest heart had been 

the castle ; so we shall have all the officers of much aSected by the recital, was now as 

justice, I suppose, besieging it ! all those ter- eager to obey as Emily was to employ her, 

rible-looking fellows one used to see at Venice. ' and she immediately quitted the room. 

* Thank God !' exclaimed Emily, fervently ; Emily's surprise increased, as she reflected 
' there is yet a hope left for me, then !' upon Annette's intelligence. 'Alas I' said she, 

* What mean you, ma'amselle ? Do you ' what can the officers of justice do against an 
wish to fall into the hands of those sad-loolung armed castle ? these cannot be such. Upon 
men ? Why I used to shudder as I passed further consideration, however, she concluded, 
them, and should have guessed what they that Montoni's bands having plundered the 
were, if Ludovico had not told me.' country round, the inhabitants had taken 

•We cannot be in worse hands than at arms, and were coming with the officers of 

present,' replied Emily, unguardedly; 'but police and. a party of soldiers to force their 

what reason have you to suppose these are wav into the castle. ' But they know not,* 

officers of justice ?' thought she, ' its strength^ or the armed num- 

' Why our people, ma'am, are all in such a bers within it. Alas ! except from flight, I 

fright and a fuss ; and I don't know anything have nothing to hope I' 

but the fear of justice that could make them Montoni, though not precisely what Emily 

so. I used to think nothing on earth could apprehended him to be — a qaptain of banditti 

fluster them, unless, indeed, it was a ghost, or — had employed his troops in enterprises ivot 

so ; but now, some of them are for hiding less daring, or less atrocious, than such a 

down in the vaults under the castle ; but you character would have undertaken. They had 

must not tell the signor this, ma'amselle, and not only pillaged, whenever opportunity 

I overheard two of them talking Holy offered, the helpless traveller, but had attacked 

Mother ! what makes you look so sad, ma'am- and phmdered the villas of several persons, 

selle ? You don't hear what I say !' which, being situated among the solitary 

'Yes, I do, Annette ; pray proceed.' recesses of the mountains, were totally unpre- 

* Well, ma'amselle, all the castle is in such pared for resistance. In these expeditions 
hurly-burly : some of the men are loading the the commanders of the party did not appear, 
cannon, and some are examining the great and the men, partly disguised, had sometimes 
gates, and the walls all round, and are ham- been mistaken for common robbers, and, at 
mering and patching up, just as if those re- others, for bands of the foreign enemy, who 
pairs had never been made, that were so long at that period invaded the country. But 
about. But what is to become of me and you, though they had already pillaged several man- 
ma' amselle, and Ludovico? O ! when I hear sions, and brought home considerable trea- 
the sound of the cannon I shall die with sures, they had ventured to approach only 
fright : if I could but catch the great gate one castle, in the attack of which they were 
open for one minute, I would be even with it assisted by other troops of their own order ; 
for shutting me within these walls so long I — from this, however, they were vigorously re- 
it should never see me again.' pulsed, and pursued by some of the foreign 

Emily caught the latter words of Annette, enemy, who were in league with the besieged. 

'O! if you could find it open, but for one Montoni's troops fled precipitately towards 

moment !' she exclaimed, * my peace might Udolpho, but were so closely tracked over the 

yet be saved !' The heavy groan she uttered, mountains, that when they reached one of the 

and the wildness of her look, terrified Annette heights in the neighbourhood of the castle, 

still more than her words ; who entreated and looked back upon the road, they per- 

Emily to explain the meaning of them, to ceived the enemy winding aiaQiv^ ^^ ^icSSs* 

n 



-4 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

below, and not more than a len^c distant. Emily now dismissed him, and with trem- 
Upon this discovery they hastened forward bling hands prepared the small package that 
with increased speed, to prepare Montoni for she meant to take with her ; wliile she was 
ti;e enemy : and it was their arrival which had employed about which, Annette returned. 
tiiroM^n tne castle into such confusion and *0 ma'amselle/ said she. 'nothing can be 
tumult. done ! Ludovico says the new porter is more 

As Emily awaited anxiously some informa- watchful ewn than Bamardine was, and we 
tlon from below, she now saw from her case- might as well throw ourselves in the way of a 
ments a body of troops pour o\'or the neigh- dragon as in his. Ludovico is almost as 
bouring heights; and though Annette had broken-hearted as you are, ma'am, on my 
been gone a x-ery short time and had a account, he says ; and I am sure I shall never 
difficult and dangerous business to accomplish, lis-e to hear the cannon fire twice 1' 
her impatience for intelligence became painful: She now began to weep, but revived upon 
she listened ; opened her door, and often \>-ent hearing of what had just occurred, and en- 
out upon the corridor to meet her. treated Emily to take her with her. 

At length she heard a footstep approach her ' That I will do most willingly,' replied 
chamber ; and opening the door, saw not Emily, ' if Signer Montoni permits it :' to 
Annette, but old Carlo ! New fears rushed which Annette made no reply, but ran out of 
upon her mind. He said he came from the the room, and immediately sought Montoni, 
signor. who had ordered him to inform her who was on the terrace surrounded by his 
th.it she must be ready to depart from officers, where she b^[an her petition. He 
Udolpho immediately, for that the castle ^\tis sharply bade her go into the castle, and abso- 
about to be besieged ; and that mules \\-cre lutely refused her request. Annette, however, 
preiwring to convey her, with her guides, to a not only pleaded for herself, but for Ludonco : 
place of safety. and Montoni had ordered some of his men to 

• Of safety !' exclaimed Emily thought- take her from his presence before die would 
Icssly ; • has, then, the signor so much con- retire. 

sideration for me ?' In an agony of disappointment she returned 

Carlo looked upon the ground, and made to Emily, who forboded little good towards 
no reply. A thousand opposite emotions herself from this refusal to Annette, and who, 
agitated Emily successively, as she listened to soon after, recci^•ed a summons to repair to 
old Carlo ; those of joy, grief, distrust and the great court, where the mules, witn their 
apprehension, appeared and vanished from guides were in waiting. Emily here tried in 
her mind with the quickness of lightning, vain to soothe the weeping Annette, who per- 
One moment it seemed impossible that Mon- sistcd in sa)nng that she should never see her 
toni could take this measure merely for lier dear young lady again ; a fear which her mis- 
prescr\-ation ; and so very strange 'was his tress secretly thought too well justified, bat 
sending her from the castle at all, that she which she endeavoured to restrain, while with 
could attribute it only to the design of carrj-- apparent composure she bade this affectionate 
ing into execution the new scheme of vcn- servant farewell. Annette, however, followed 
geance with which he had menaced her. In to the courts, which were now thronged with 
the next instant it appeared so desirable to people busy in preparation for the enemy; 
quit the castle, under any circumstances, that and having seen her mount her mule, and de- 
she could not but rejoice in the prospect, part with her attendants through the portal, 
believidg that change must be for the better, turned into the castle and wept again, 
till she remembered the probability of Valan- Emily, meanwhile, as she looked back upon 
court being detained in it ; when sorrow and the gloomy courts of the castle, no lon«»er 
regret usurped her mind, and she wished silent as when she had first entered them, but 
nmchmorefen,'ently than she had j-et done, that resounding with the noise of preparation for 
it might not be his voice which she had heard, their defence, as well as crowded with soldiers 
Carlo having reminded her that she had no and workmen hurrying to and fro ; and when 
time to lose, for that the enemy won.' ^^itllill she passed once more under the huge port- 
sight of the castle. Emily entreated him to in- cullis which had formerly struck her with 
fomi her whither she was to go; and after terror and dismay, and, looking round, saw no 
some hesitation, he said he had receiv-ed no walls to confine her steps — felt, in spite of an- 
orders to tell ; but on her repeating the ticipation, the sudden joy of a prisoner who 
question, replied that he belieN-ed she was to unexpectedly finds himself at liberty. This 
be carried into Tuscany. emoiion would not suflferher now to look im- 

• To Tuscany !' exclaimed Emily—' and partially on the dangers that awaited her 
^^ X ^^i^^cr?" without ; on mountains infested by hostile 

Carlo answered that he knew nothing fur- parties, who seized every opportunity for 
ther than that she was to be lodged in a plunder ; and on a journey commenced under 
^?^^il^*A°" ^^^ borders of Tuscany, at the feet the guidance of men whose countenances cer- 
of the Apenmnes— • not a day's journey dis- tainly did not speak favourably of their dis- 
r.jnt, said he. V^aiUons. In the present moments, she 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, g| 

could only rejoice that she was liberated from alongf, or busy upon the walls, preparing the 
those walls which she had entered with such cannon. 

dismal forebodings ; and, remembering the Having emezged from the woods, they 
superstitious presentiment which had then wound along the vallev in an opposite direc- 
scizcd her, she could now smile at the impres- tion to that from wnence the enemy were 
sion it had made upon her mind. approaching. Emily had now a full view of 

As she gazed, with these emotions, upon Udolpho, with its grey walls, towers and 
the turrets of the castle rising high over the terraces, high over-toppmg the precipices and 
woods among which she wound, the stranger, the dark woods, and skittering partially with 
whom she believed to be confined there, re- the arms of the condottieri, as the sun's rays, 
turned to her remembrance ; and anxiety and streaming through an autumnal cloud, glanced 
apprehension, lest he should be Valancourt, upon a part of the edifice, whose remaining 
again passed like a cloud upon her joy. She features stood in darkened majesty. She 
recollected every circumstance concerning this continued to gaze through her tears, upon 
unknown person, since the night when she walls that perhaps confined Valancourt, and 
had first heard him play the song- of her which now, as the cloud floated away, were 
native province ;— circumstances which she lighted up with tudden splendour, and then, 
had so often recollected and compared before, as suddenly, were shrouded in gloom ; while 
without extracting from them anything like the passing gleam fell on the wood-tops below, 
conviction, and which still only prompted her and heightened the first tints of autunm that 
to believe that Valancourt was a prisoner at had begun to steal upon the foliage. The 
Udolpho. It was possible, however, that the winding mountains at length shut Udolpho 
men who were her conductors might afford from her view, and she turned with mournful 
her information on this subject ; but fearing reluctance to other objects. The melancholy 
to question them immediately, lest they should sighing of the wind among the pines that 
be unwilling to discover any circumstance to waved high over the steeps, and the distant 
her in the presence of each other, she watched thunder of a torrent, assisted her musings, 
for an opportunity of speaking with them and conspired, with the wild scenery around, 
separately. to diffuse over her mind emotions solemn, yet 

Soon after, a trumpet echoed faintly from a not unpleasing, but which were soon inter- 
distance ; the guides stopped, and looked to- rupted by the distant roar of cannon echoing 
wards, the quarter whence it came; but the among the mountains. The sounds rolled 
thick woods which surrounded them exclud- along the wind, and were repeated in faint 
ing all view of the country beyond, one of the and fainter reverberation, till they simk in 
men rode on to the point of an eminence sullen murmm^. This was a signal that the 
that aflforded a more extensive prospect, to enemy {lad reached the castle, and fear for 
observe how near the enemy, whose trumpet Valancourt again tormented Emily. She 
he guessed this to be, were advanced ; the turned her anxious eye towards that part of 
other, meanwhile, remained with Emily, and the country where the edifice stood, but the 
to him siie put some questions concerning the intervening heights concealed it from her 
stranger at Udolpho. Ugo, for this was his view ; still, however, she saw the tall head of 
name, said that there were several prisoners a moimtain which immediate^ fronted her 
in the castle ; but he neither recollected their late chamber, and on this she fixed her gaze, 
persons, nor the precise time of their arrival, as if it could have told her <rf all that was 
and could therefore give her no information, passing in the scene it overlooked. The 
There was a surliness in his manner, as he guides tvdce reminded her that she was losing 
spoke, that made it probable he would not time, and that they had far to go, before she 
have satisfied her inquiries, even if he could could turn, from this interesting object ; and 
have done so. even when she again moved onward, she often 

Having asked him what prisoners had been sent a look back, till only its blue point, 
taken, about the time, as nearly as she could brightening in a gleam of sunshine, appeared 
remember, when she had first heard the music, peeping over other mountains. 
' All that week,' said Ugo, ' I was out with a The sound of the cannon affected Ugo, as 
partyuponthe mountains, and knewnothing of the blast of the trumpet does the war-horse ; 
what was doing at the castle. We had enough it called forth all the fire of his nature ; he 
upon our hands, we had warm work of it. ' was impatient to be in the midst of the fight, 
Bertrand, the other man, being now re- and uttered frequent execrati<ms against Mon- 
tumed, Emily inquired no further ; and when toni for having sent him t<J'« distance. The 
he had related to his companion what he had feelings of his comrade seemed to be very 
seen, they travelled on in deep silence ; while opposite, and adapted rather to the cruelties 
Emily often caught between the opening than to the dangers of wiar. 
woods partial glimpses of the castle above — Emily aiked frequent questions concerning 
the west towers, whose battlements were now the place of her destination, but could only 
crowded with archers, and the ramparts learn that she was going to a cottage in Tus- 
below, where soldiers were seen hurryhig cany ; a.ixdY(lv<w«^^ ^^'b^sjSwjkjr^'^r^^^ 



9^ 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



ject. 5he fancied she perceived, in tb.e coimien- impracticable to speak alone with Bertrand on 

an^cl of tl.oH' n;Ln, an expression of malice that subject, she renewed her questions in the 

and cunning that alarmed her. presence of Ugo ; but he either was. or pre- 

It was afternoon when they had left the tended to be. entirely ignorant concerning the 

castle. During se^•e^al hours, iht-y travelled stranger. WTien he had dismissed the ques- 

tbrough regions of profound solitude, where tion, he talked wth Ugo on some subject 

no bleat of sheep, or bark of watch-dog. which led to the mention of Signor Orsmo, 

iM-oke on silence, and they were now too farofjf and of the af&ir that had banished him frcwn 

to hear even tlie faint thunder of the cannon. Venice ; respecting which Emily had \-en- 

Towards evening, they wound down preci- tured to ask a few questions. Ugo appeared 

pices black with forests of cypress, pine, and to be well acquainted with the circumstances 

cedar, into a glen so savage and secluded that, of that tragical event, and related some 

if Solitude ever had local habiuiiion, this minute particulars that both shocked and sur- 

might have been 'her place of dearest resi- prised her; for it appeared very extraordinary 

dencc.' To Kmily it appeared a spot exactly how such particulars could be known to any, 

suited for the retreat of banditti, and in her but to persons present when the assassination 

imagination she already saw them lurking was committed. 

under the brow of some projecting rock, ' He was of rank/ said Bertrand, * or the 

whence their shadows, lengthened by the state would not have troubled itself to inquire 

setting sun, stretched across the road, and after his assassins. Tlie signor has been lucky 

warned the traveller of his dimj^or. She hitherto ; this is not the first af^r of Uie kind 

shuddered at the idea; and lo<'.:ii'.n: at her he has had upon his hands ; and to be sure, 

conductors, to observe whetlK-r ilioy were when a gentleman has no other way of getting 

armed, thought she saw in them the banditti redress — why he must take this.' 

she dreaded ! 'Aye,' said \jmQ» 'and why is not this as 

It was in this glen that they proposed to good as another ? This is the way to have 

alight, ' For,' said Ugo, 'night' will come on justice done at once, without more ado. If 

presently, and then the wolves will make it you go to law, you must stay till the judges 

dangerous to stop. ' This \\ as a new subject please, and may lose your cause at last. Wiy 

of alarm to Emily, but inferior to what she the best way, then, is to make sure of your 

suffered from the thought of being left in right, while you can, and execute justice your- 

these wilds, at midnight, with two such men self.' 

as her present conductors. Dark and dread- ' Yes, yes,* rejoined Bertrand, • if you wait 

ful hints of what niijjht be Montonis pur- till justice is done you — ^you may stay long 

pose in sending her hither, came to herniind. enough. Why if I want a friend of mine 

She endeavoured to dissuade the men from properly sen-ed, how am I to get my revenge? 

slopping, and inquired with anxiety how far Ten to one they tell me he is in the right, and 

they had yet to go. I am in the wrong. Or, if a fellow has got 

' Many leagues yet,' replied Bertrand, ' As possession of property which I think ought to 

for you, signora, you may do as you please be mine, why I may wait till I starve, per- 

about eating, but for us, wc will make a hearty haps, before the law will give it me; and 

supper while we can ; wo. shall have need of then, after all, the judge may say — ^the estate 

it, I warrant, before we finish our journev. is his. What is to be done then ? — Why the 

The sun's goin^;: down apace ; lot us alight case is plain enough, I must take it at last.' 

under that rock yonder. ' Emily's horror at this conversation was 

His comrade assented, and turning tlie heightened by a suspicion that the latter part 

mucsoubof the road, they advajiccd towards of it was pointed against herself, and that 

a clift overhung with cedars, Emily following these men had been commissioned by Mon- 

m tremblmg silence. 1 hey lifted her from her toni to execute a similar kind of justice in his 

mule, and having seated themselves on the cause. 

grass at the foot of the rocks, drew some 'But I was speaking of Signor Orsino ' re- 
homely fare from a wallet, of which Emily sumed Bertrand; 'he is one of those who 
tried to eat a little, the better to ^ist^ui' e lu r love to do justice at once. I remember, about 

'^^Tiifi^^?,«°.!!^' , , , . ^^" >'^^'^'"s ago. the signor had a quarrel with 

1 lie sun was now .sunk behmd the high a cavaliero of Milan. The story -vas told me 

!Io°,« w^l ? ^^ ^^'^^^' "1'^^ ^^"^^^^ a P^T^lc then, and it is still fresh in my teead. They 

iSh^ ^^. spread, and the gloom of twi- quarrelled about a lady that the signor liked 

ll) the l^^S^ulii^^ surrounding objects, and she was perverse enough to prefer the 

mssinir am^^ IT^^ niurmur of the breeze gentleman of Milan, and even carried her 

Scd fN^Sln^V'^^'^''/^^ "^ ^5"-^^ whim sofaras to marry him. This provoked 

iSred w h^tS wEZ^frf^^'^' ^^' !J '^^ ^^^'^°^' ^ ^^" '^ ^^^^^^' ^^^ ^^ ^^d tried to 

the evening hou?to d nrlf if ^ '® • ''^''^ ^""^ ^^ ""^^^ *° ^^ ^ 1°"^ ^'^i^e, and used to 

Suspense had so miwJJ; t«l ^?V ^®^^ P*»P^<^ ^o serenade her under her windows 

as to the prisons- aTudo\n[.!r't^^ l^ ^ ^^'^^ • ^^ used to make verses about 

««• at Udolpho. thai fvutog It her, and would swear she was the handsomest 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOtPHO. 37 

lady in Milan. — But all would not do — ' Bertrand !' exclaimed Emily, pale with 

nothing would bring her to reason ; and, as I horror, on whom not a syllable of this nar- 

said, she went so far as to marry this other rative had been lost. 

cavaliero. This made the signor wroth, with ' Bertrand, did I say ?* rejoined the man with 

a vengeance : he resolved to be even with her some confusibn — ' No, Giovanni. But I have 

though; and he watched his opportunity, forgot where. I was; — "Bertrand," said the 

and did not wait long, for soon after th3 signor — ' 

marriage they set out for Padua, nothing ' Bertrand again !* said Emily in a faltering 

doubting, I warrant, of what was preparing voice, ' why do you repeat that name ?' 

for them. The cavaliero thought, to be sure, Bertrand swore. ' What signifies it,' he 

he was to be called to no account, but was to proceeded, ' what the man was called — Ber- 

go off triumphant ; but he was soon made to trand or Giovanni, — or Roberto ; it's all one 

know another sort of story.' for that. You have put me out twice with 

* What, then the lady had promised to have that — question. Bertrand or Giovanni — or 

Signor Orsino?' said Ugo. what you will — "Bertrand," said the signor, 

'Promised! No,' replied Bertrand, 'she "if your comrades had done their duty as 

had not wit enough even to tell him she liked well as you, I should not have lost the lady, 

him, as I heard, but the contrary, for she used Go, my honest fellow, and be happy with 

to say, from the first, she never meant to have this. " He gave him a purse of gold — and little 

him. And this was what provoked the signor enough too, considering the service he had 

so ; and with good reason, for who likes to be done him.' 

told that he is disagreeable? and this was saying 'Aye, aye,' said Ugo, 'little enough — ^little 

as good. It was enough to tell him this ; she enough.' 

need not have gone and married another. ' Emily now breathed with difficulty, and 

' What, she married, then, on purpose to could scarcely support herself. When first 

plague the signor?' said Ugo. she saw these men, their appearance and their 

•I don't know as for that,' replied Bertrand: connexion with Montoni had been sufficient 
* they said, indeed, that she had had a regard to impress her with distrust ; but now, when 
for the other gentleman a great while ; but one of them had betrayed himself to be a 
that is nothing to the purpose, she should not murderer, and she saw herself at the approach 
have married him, and then the signor would of night under his guidance, among wild and 
not have been so much provoked. She might solitary mountains, and going she scarcely 
have expected what was to follow : it was knew whither, the most agonizing terror seized 
not to be supposed he would bear her ill usage her, which was the less supportable from the 
tamely, and she might thank herself for what necessity she found herself under of conc^- 
happened. But, as I said, they set out for ing all symptoms of it from her companions. 
Padua, she and her husband, and the road Reflecting on the charagter and the menaces 
lay over some barren mountains like these, of Montoni, it appeared not improbable that 
This suited the signor's purpose well. He he had delivered her to them, for the purpose 
watched the time of their departure, and sent of having her murdered, and of thus securing 
his men after tlieni, with directions what to to himself, without further opposition or delay, 
do. They kept their distance till they saw the estates for which he had so long and so 
their opportunity, and this did not happen till desperately contended. Yet, if this vras his 
the second day's' journey, when, the gentleman design, there appeared no necessity for send- 
having sent his servants forward to the next ing her to such a distance from the castle ; 
town, may-be to have horses in readiness, the for if any dread of discovery had made him 
signor's men quickened their pace, and over- unwilling to perpetrate the deed there, a much 
took the carriage in a hollow between two nearer place might have sufficed for the pur- 
mountains, where the woods prevented the pose of concealment. These considerations, 
servants from seeing what passed, though they however, did not immediately occur to Eniily, 
were then not far off. When we came up, we with whom so many circumstances conspired 
fired our tromboni, but missed.' to rouse terror, that she had no power to 

Emily turned pale at these words, and then oppose it, or to inquire coolly into its grounds ; 

hoped she had mistaken them; while Ber- andif she had done so, still there were many ap- 

trand proceeded : pearances vi^hich would too well have justified 

^'Thc gentleman fired again; but he was ner most terrible apprehensions. She did not 

soon made to alight : and it was as he turned dare to speak to her conductors, at the sound 

to call his people that he was stmck. It was of whose voices she trembled ; and when, now 

the most dexterous feat you ever saw— he and then, she stole a glance at them, their 

was struck in the back with three stilettos at countenances, seen imperfectly through the 

once. He fell, and was dispatched in a gloom of evening, served to confirm her ^rs. 

minute ; but the lady escaped ; for the servants The sun had now been set some time ; 

had heard the firing, and came up before she heavy clouds, whose lower skirts were tinged 

could be taken care of. " Bertrand," said the with sulphureous crimson, lingered in the 

signor, when his men returned ' west, and threw a reddisli tint ijj^wa.^JcR.'^'^^^ 



I "'. — 1 ?.::--. li r.?T .v-.*.:-: :::i.V.->r.: 12 I'r.s surround'r.S 

7 ■„ : : -l-.r.rer?. >-.; r. :.v '.Mke^i v^ith litile emouon 

- -■■=—;: ■-:-.? --.'i i.r.r!:?. mi the rloorav road and 

L ■■-: -. .-.- 7". :•;■■■. -.-. "r.:?-* c"-".'.ir.*s or.'y were dii- 

-■ ' .1 : -r: z'.? :/.r:"rr. C'.e dusk; — objcc:-. 

■ -■£-■ ■■;•?- •• •■'■...": ■-"-: '.i:-:'y hid i~ec:ei her >piri:5 so 

■ ■ ' : -■" ".-:/. .-Ls:; .-.-^ . ■.!■.:- '-.err! i \-:ew-s of ihe future, 

' .i zs.i :: i.-Zii'r.y^f- ::': :r.:?ir owii gloom. 

-. . - :.- - .-::■ I: --.i? ~r.: v ?3 r.:.-.r'.y dirk, ih.it ihe tra- 

■ - y -.' r'.i ■I'.'.iTS^ ^v■-^ 7r:':::--ii only by ihe slowest 

. . •:-■.; 7::? cru'i 5C.\r;c'y di?c-:jm' their way. TI:-; 

- . r -.5 . -li?. -A.-rh so-:-.::! chirked \%::h thunder. 

-.. :: ■ .. - ; - ■:-.7 = j'. -':■•"-/ :l1:~- :"-e heavens, sho^^ing at 




r.^ 



rept 

_: ; T ::? r'.r. .Ir. I :!-i?n rvished among the 

.-. -.■■-: :■■'.?. Er...'." 5*-.:vered as it p.issed. 

.:? '."-.::-: :» il.i :;r:h/ siii Ugo. *:: grows 

-' ' N : ^:» -:.-.-:< :•■: r:7::i B?rtr:ir,d. 'bat 

.?•■•■ ."■■.::- . ■ -T. i ::5 best not light 

C : . *. ■.■.■-■■-■ ■■-:■.•:?>.. I ?r:to.-iy betray 

; := :; .?./ y.::rz .~- ;Vi^>" ^^ l^* enemy is 

7 V, . ■.-.:::;-■ ■ ?:— . ::'-!r.^ which Emily did 

;■ r. :: -.: ■ " "fiv- .". .■.:: 1 •.'•-•.^y ^rcceeded in dark- 

:: :■ ■;- • ' .??>.. .•.! ■.: " -: ■.■i.if;:->i ;hai t!:e enemy 

:: ~. ;'.: :.?:-. er :>..r.. • :':r from change there 

:- •■- .- ?;r. ?-!.r ::» -'T-- since she could 

; ;c ■ rj : ". • : r . ;. ^ . - :■ :. - . ? . :uj.:;wa more dreadful 



A?' 



r-.-oI 'l:-i'y a!;>n^. her attention 



^:.. ■;■ '....- .. • :. ■ . -■ . v . ^ ::-> - ._5 «.: — r.-: ' " v a !h:- Lipering iLime that 

-: :-::^ .■.: • - .• ■ -; • . :--:"*;- .\~ ■'■'-■: rv ••- x: :";e feint of the pike 

"•::•:. •- . - ■ .■-.:■. :.:v .:r ■ ■ : -. ; :r. — :-. . ■..— .f - . rese-'-.-.n^ what she 

•■■-:: ■■.-■. ;- .■- ----«: - ; ■ -: :■-:.::- :'.j l.i r.:e cf the sentinel the 

. . . . .-; : :« - ■'..:'. T ' :. -.::: ?'-.l-.r- .V:?.:::-.: d:?d. and which he 

v.: ••::. 7. ;.;■ = .. " .rj 1" :-•:.:%-* ::•: c-";?a. The event imme- 






r . ■-•■ ■ :. -. ;::-:r. i:.i::' :;" ■ -.r. :: .•'/reired to justify the 
— .-..■. .'..■..:■.'..:? 7-er- .-^jf:--. — *7. i ;. 5".-:r>:.:!:us impression had 

> : ■ r. '.. v.V.ich the present 

>'::r' thxiirht it was 

•'.:■'. .'.::.: v.-a:c';?d it suc- 

-.v::r.. :r. ~'.ccny *:".once, 

■■ ■"••■-.. ■ -- .• - T3., —••-»• J 
... . ..^ .. .» ._■_. t^^ . .. , 1 .1. 

\.".\\ ■ -.id he. *ar-.l eel 

'..• ■ -"ods ; — a £:cmi is 






<k«t---.« ---^^. - .^ ,. -----■— ■•.^__, . ».»., *««^^ 






' ^ ■ 



i ■ • ' " - "^ ' \ ■ ■• ■:-"* T". "♦ p*^-*» o^ t^ -^c-* 

:>-.'.e. '.v/.o V .■■' : •.•..m 7«.".le at .-uch a 

::- - .; :: '. :::>tc a lhii:>dor- 

:" « .- .-. K ■ -. -Li \:.xi, and one is coming 

' . -"' ' .: " . • ? : -J .-■• . -..--■: .• c:: i.r.i. The clouds flash fast 

she -luld al.v.ci: '.-.-.•.e \,y. -• . : l^r^e!:' -.'.i^ Er.i:ly was rci:-2Vwd bv this conversation 



\-:ct;ai of fr>h::u: vi^icr.s g!-.::-^ ur:r. a from scr.:? c ;' -.he terrors of suoe.-siiiion : but 
r.isordered fanc}-. * I'.-.cie cf re.-..on increased, as.* u-aitmr while 



__ ■■._'•■ • • ... "' 




they 
• S« vr V. .'jiS Hsr:hebn on Electricity. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



39 



the harsh countenances of her companions. 
Ugo could not find a flint, and Bertrand 
became impatient, for the thunder sounded 
hollowly at a distance, and the lightning was 
more frequent. Sometimes it revealed the 
nearer recesses of the woods, or, displaying 
some opening in their summits, illumined the 
ground beneath with partial splendour, the 
thick foliage of the trees preserving the sur- 
rounding scene in deep shadow. 

At length Ugo found a flint, and the torch 
was lighted. The men then dismounted, and, 
having assisted Emily, led the mules towards 
the woods that skirted the glen on the left, 
over broken ground, frequently interrupted 
with brush-wood and wild plants, which she 
was often obliged to make a circuit to avoid. 

She could not approach these woods 
without experiencing keener sense of her 
danger. Their deep silence, except when the 
wind swept among their bmnches, and im- 
penetrable gloom shown partially by the sud- 
den flash, and then by the red glare of the 
torch, which served only to make darkness 
visible, were circumstances that contributed to 
renew all her most terrible apprehensions ; 
she thought, too, that at this moment the 
countenances of her conductors displayed 
more than their usual fierceness, mingled with 
a kind of lurking exultation, which they 
seemed endeavouring to disguise. To her 
affrighted fancy it occurred that they were 
leading her into these woods to complete the 
will of Montoni by her murder. The horrid 
suggestion called a groan from her heart, 
which surprised her companions, who turned 
round quickly towards her, and she demanded 
why they led her thither, beseeching them to 
continue their way along the open glen, which 
she represented to be less dangerous than the 
woods in a thunder-storm. 

'No, no,' said Bertrand, 'we know best 
where the danger lies. See how the clouds 
open over our heads. Besides, we can glide 
under cover of the woods with less hazard of 
being seen, should any of the enemy be wan- 
dering this way. By holy St. Peter and all 
the rest of them, I've as stout a heart as the 
best, as many a poor devil could tell, if he 
were alive again — ^but what can we do 
against numbers T 

'What are you whining about?* said Ugo 
contemptuously — ' Who fears niunbers ? Let 
them come, though they were as many as the 
signer's castle could hold : I would show the 
knaves what fighting is. For you — I would 
lay you quietly in a dry ditch, where you 
might peep out, and see me put the rogues to 
flirfit.— Who talks of fear?* 

Bertrand replied, with a horrible oath, that 
he did not like such jesting ; and a violent 
altercation ensued, which was at length 
silenced by the thunder, whose deep volley 
was heard afkr, rolling onward till it burst 
ovei: their bteds \n soimds that seemed to 



shake the earth to its centre. The ruffians 
paused, and locfked upon each other. Be- 
tween the boles of the trees the blue lightning 
flashed and quivered along the ground, while, 
as Emily looked under the boughs, the moun- 
tains beyond ftequently appear^ to be dothed 
in livid flame. At this moment, perhaps, she 
felt less fear of the storm than did either of 
her companions, for other terrors occupied 
her mind. 

The men now rested under an enormous 
chestnut tree, and fixed their pikes in the 
ground at some distance ; on the iron points 
of which Emily repeatedly observed the light- 
ning play, and then glide down them into the 
earth. 

* I would we were well in the signer's cas- 
tle !' said Bertrand, ' I know not why he 
should send us on this business. Hark ! how 
it rattles above, there! I could almost -find 
in my heart to turn priest, and pray. Ugo 
has got a rosary !' 

•No,' replied Ugo,.* I leave it to cowards 
like thee, to carry rosaries — I carry a sword.' 

' And much good may it do thee in fighting 
against the storm !' said Bertrand. 

Another peel which was reverberated in 
tremendous echoes among the mountains, 
silenced them for a moment. As it rolled 
away, U^o proposed going on. ' We are only 
losing time here,' said he, 'for the thict 
boughs of the wood will shelter us as wdl as 
this chestnut tree.' 

They again led the mules forward, betweeh 
the boles of the trees, and over pathless grass 
that concealed their high knotted roots. The 
rising wind was now heard contending with 
the thunder, as it .rushed furiously among the 
branches above, and brightened the red flame 
of the torch, which threw a stronger light for- 
ward among the woods, and showed their 
gloomy recesses to be suitable resorts for the 
wolves, of which Ugo had formerly spoken. 

At length the strength of the wind seemed 
to drive the storm before it, for the thunder 
rolled away into distance, and was only faintly 
heard. After travelling through the "woods 
for nearly an hour, during which the elements 
seemed to have returned to repose, the tra- 
vellers, gradually ascending from the glen, 
found themselves upon the open brow of a 
mountain, ^vith a wide valley extending in 
misty moonlight at their feet, and above, the 
blue sky trembling through the few thin 
clouds that lingered after the storm, and were 
sinking slowly to the verge of the horizon. 

Emily's spirits, now that she had quitted 
the woods, began to revive ; for she con- 
sidered that if these men had received an 
order to destroy her, they would probably 
have executed their barbarous purpose in the 
solitary wild fi'om whence they had just 
emerged, where the deed would have beetL 
shrouded from ct^t^ VMcrcass. ^^. '^aaasosfc^ 
by Ms te^«id<5iu» «0Ji^y3 ^^ ^^^^ ^^^Rosastfsvix 



^ THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

of her guides, Emily, as they proceeded and called up his wife to set refreshments 
silently in a kind of sheep track that wound before the travellCTs. As this man conversed, 
alone the skirts of the woods, which ascended rather apart, with Bertrand, Emily anxiously 
on w right, could not survey the sleeping surveyed him. He was a tall but not robust 
beauty of the vale, to which they were declin- peasant, of sallow complexion, and had a 
ing, without a momentary sen^tion of plea- shrewd and cunning qre ; his countenance 
sure. It seemed varied with woods, pastures, was not of a character to win the ready confi- 
nnd sloping grounds, and was screened to the dence of youth, and there was nothing in his 
north and the east by an amphitheatre of the manner that might conciliate a stranger. 
Apennines, whose outline on the horizon was Ugo called impatiently for supper, and in a 
here broken into varied and elegant forms ; to tone as if he knew his authority here to be un- 
the west and the south the landscape ex- questionable. ' I expected you here an hour 
tended indistinctly into the low lands of ago,' said the peasant. ' for I have had Signer 
Tuscany. Montoni's letter these three hours, and I and 

' There is the sea yonder,' said Bertrand, — my wife had given you up, and gone to bed. 
as if he had known that Emily was examining How did you fare in the storm 7 
the twilight view, — 'yonder in the west, '111 enough,' replied Ugo, ' ill enough, and 
though we cannot see it.' we are likely to fare ill enough here, too, 

Emily already perceived a chaage in the unless you will make more haste. Get us 
climate, from that of the wild and mountain- more wine, and let us see what you have to 
ous tract she had left; and as she con- eat.' 

tinned descending, the air became perfumed The peasant placed before them all that his 
by the breath of a thousand nameless flowers cottage afforded — ham, wine, figs, and grapes 
among the grass, called forth by the late rain, of such size and flavour as Emuy had ^dom 
So soothingly beautiful was the scene around tasted. 

her, and so strikingly contrasted to the After taking refreshment, she was shown \fj 
gloomy grandeur of those to which she had the peasant's wife to her little bed-chamber, 
long been confined, and to the manners of where she asked some questions concerning 
the people who moved among them, that she Montoni ; to which the woman, whose name 
could almost have fancied herself again at La was Dorina, gave reserved answers, pretending 
Vallee ; and, wondering why Montoni had ignorance of his Excellenza*s intention in 
sent her thither, could scarcely believe that he sending Emily hither, but acknowledging that 
had selected so enchanting a spot for any her husband had be^ apprized of the circmn- 
cruel design. It was, however, probably not stance. Perceiving that she could obtain no 
the spot, but the persons who happened to in- intelligence concerning her destination, Emily 
habit it, and to whose care he could safely dismissed Dorina, and retired to repose : but 
commit the execution of his plans, whatever all the busy scenes of the past and the antid- 
they might be that had determined his pated ones of the future came to her anxious 
choice. mind, and conspired with the sense of her new 

She now ventured again to inquire whether situation to bamsh sleep, 
they were near the place of their destination, 

and was answered by Ugo, that they had not _^ 

far to go. ' Only to the wood of chestnuts in 
the valley yonder,' said he, 'there, by the 

brook that sparkles with the moon ; I wish I CHAPTER XXXIL 

was once at rest there, with a flask of good . Was nouj^ht around but images of rest, 
wine and a slice of Tuscany bacon. Sleep-soothing groves and quiet lawnTbetween. 

Emily s spirits revived when she heard that And tlowery beds that slumbrous influence kest. 
the journey was so nearly concluded, and saw From poppies breathed, and banks of pleasant 
the wood of chestnuts in an open part of the _.„ sreen, 
vale, on the margin of the stream. Where never yet was creeping creature seen 

In a short timrthey reached the entrance of i^nXS:d"rSw1.^^^^^^^^^^ 
the wood, and perceived between the twinkling That, as they bicker'd through the sunny gUde, 
leaves a light streaming from a distant cot- Though restless still themselves, a lulling murmur 
tage window. They proceeded along the made.' 

edge of the brook to where the trees, crowding Thomson. 

over it, excluded the moonbeams ; but a long When Emily, in the morning, opened her 
hne of light, from the cottage above, was seen casement, she was surprised to observe the 
on its dark tremulous surface. Bertrand now beauties that surrounded it. The cottage 
stepped on first, and Emily heard him knock, was nearly embowered in the woods, which 
and call loudly at the door. As she reached were chiefly of chestnut intermixed with some 
It, the smslll upper casement, where the light cypress, larch, and syc^more. Beneath the 
appeared, was unclosed by a man, who, hav- dark and spreading branches appeared to the 
mg inquired what they wanted, immediately north and to the east the woody Apennines 
oesceaaed, let them into a nesix ruaUc ctot, lisins in majestic amphitheatre, not black with 



'i 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



4t 



pines, as she had been accustomed to see 
them, but their loftiest summits crowned 
with ancient forests of chestnut, oak, and 
oriental plane, now animated with the rich 
tints of autumn, and which swept downward 
to the valley unintemiptedly, except where 
some bold rocky promontory looked out from 
among the foliage, and caught the passing 
gleam. Vineyards stretched along the feet of 
the mountains, where the elegant villas of 
the Tuscan nobility frequently adorned the 
scene, and overlooked slopes clothed with 
groves of olive, mulberry, orange, and lemon. 
ITie plain to which these declined, was 
coloured with the riches of cultivation, whose 
mingled hues were mellowed into harmony by 
an Italian sun. Vines, their purple clusters 
blushing between the russet foliage, hung in 
luxuriant festoons from the branches of 
standard fig and cherry trees, while pastures 
of verdure, such as Emily had seldom seen in 
Italy, enriched the banks of a stream that, 
after descending from the mountains, wound 
along the landscape, which it reflected, to a 
bay of the sea. There, far in the west, the 
waters, fading into the sky, assumed a tint of 
the faintest purple, and the Une of separation 
between them was now and then discernible 
only by the progress of a sail, brightened 
with the sunbeam, along the horizon. 

The cottage, which was shaded by the 
woods from the intenser rays of the sun, and 
was open only to his evening light, was 
covered entirely with vines, fig-trees, and 
jessamine whose flowers surpassed in size and 
fragrance any that Emily had seen. These 
ripening clusters of grapes hung round her 
little casement. The turf, that grew under 
the woods, was inlaid with a variety of wild 
flowers and perfumed herbs, and on the oppo- 
site margin of the stream, whose current dif- 
fused freshness beneath the shades, rose a 
grove of lemon and orange trees. This, 
though nearly opposite to Emily's window, 
did not interrupt her prospect, but rather 
heightened, by its dark verdure, the effect of 
the perspective ; and to her this spot was a 
bower of sweets, whose charms communicated 
imperceptibly to her mind somewhat of their 
own serenity. 

She was soon summoned to breakfast by 
the peasant's daughter, a girl of about seven- 
teen, of a pleasant countenance, which, Emily 
was glad to observe, seemed animated with 
the pure affections of nature, though the others 
that surrounded her expressed, more or less, 
the worst qualities — cruelty, ferocity, cunning, 
and duplicity ; of the latter style of counten- 
ance, especially, were those of the peasant 
and his wife. Maddelina spoke httle ; but 
what she said was in a soft voice, and with an 
air of modesty and complacency that interested 
Emily^who breakfasted at a separate table 
with Dorina, while Ugo and Btrtrand were 
taking a repast of Tuscany bacon and wine 



with their host, near the cottage door ; when 
they had finished which, Ugo, rising hastily, 
inquired for his mule, and Emily learned that 
he was to return to Udolpho, while Bertrand 
remained at the cottage ; a circumstance 
which, though it did not surprise, distressed 
her. 

When Ugo was departed, Emily proposed 
to walk in the neighbouring woods ; but on 
being told that she must not quit the cottage 
without having Bertrand for her attendant, 
she withdrew to her own room. There, as 
her eyes settled on the towering Apennines, 
she recollected the ^errific scenery they had 
exhibited, and the horrors she had suffered, 
on the preceding night, particularly at the 
moment when B^trand had betrayed himself 
to be an assassin ; and these remembrances 
awakened a train of images, which, since they 
abstracted her from a consideration of her 
own situation, she pursued for some time, * 
and then arranged in the followinp^ lines ; 
pleased to have discovered any mnocent 
means by which she could beguile an hour of 
misfortune. 

THE PILGRIM.* . 

Slow o'er the Apennine, with bleeding feet, 

A patient pilerim wound his lonely way. 

To deck the Lady of Loretto's seat, 

With all the little wealth his zeal could pay. 

From mountain-tops cold died the evemng ray. 

And, stretch'd in twilight, slept the vale below; 

And now the last, last purple streaks of day 

Along the melancholy West fade slow. 

High o'er his head the restless pines complain. 

As on their summit rolls the breeze of night ; 

Beneath, the hoarse stream chides the rocks in 

vain : % 

The Pilgrim pauses on the dizzy height. 
Then to the vale his cautious step he press'd. 
For there a hermit's cro^ was dimly seen. 
Cresting the rock, and there his limbs might rest, 
Cheer'd in the good man's cave, by faggotrs sheen. 
On leafy beds, nor guile his sleep molest. 
Unhappy Luke ! he trusts a treacherous clue I 
Behind the cliff the lurking robber stood ; 
No friendly moon his giant shadow threw 
Athwart the road, to save the Pilgrim's blood ; 
On as he went a vesper hymn he sang. 
The hymn that nightly sooth'd him to repose. 
Fierce on his harmless prey the rufl&an sprang I 
The Pilgrim bleeds to death, his eye-lids dose. 
Yet his meek spirit knew no vengeful care. 
But, dying, for his murderer breathed — a sainted 
prayer I 

Preferring the solitude of her room to the 
company of the person below stairs, Emily 
dined above, and Maddelina was suffered to 
attend her, from whose simple conversation 
she learned that the peasant and his wife were 
old inhabitants of this cottage, which had 
been purchased for them by Montoni in re- 
ward of some service rendered him many 
years before by Marco, to whom Carlo, the 
steward at the castle, was nearly related. 

♦This poem and that entitled * TVv^ T«n4«=*^ 
have a\Te9id^ «5^^^tVm^\««&va^'«'^^^^*»»^ 



4a THE MYSTRRIRS OP UDOLPHO. 

'So many years ago, signora,' added Madde- tains, shadowed upon the horizon, remained 

lina, • that I know nothing about it ; but my visible. But a dear moonlight that suc- 

father did the signor a great good, for my ceeded, gave to the landscape what time gives 

mother has often said to him, this cottage to the scenes of past life, when it softens all 

was the least he ought to have had.' their harsher features, and throws over the 

To the mention of this circumstance Emily whole the mellowing shade of distant con- 
listened with a painful interest, since it ap- templation. The scenes of La ValMe in the 
peared to give a frightful colour to the cha- early mom of her life, when she was protected 
racter of Marco, whose service, thus rewarded and bdoved by parents equally loved, ap- 
by Montoni, she could scarcely doubt had peared in Emily's memory tenderly beautiful, 
been criminal ; and, if so, had too much like the prospect before her, and awakened 
reason to believe that she had been committed mournful comparisons. Unwilling to en- 
into his hands for some desperate purpose, counter the coarse behaviour of the peasant's 
• Did you ever hear how many years it is,' wife, she remained supperless in her room, 
said Emily, who was considering of Signora while she wept again over her forlorn and 
Laurentini's disappearance from Udolpho, perilous situation, a review of which entirely 
' since yoiu: father performed the service you overcame the small remains of her fortitude ; 
spoke of?* and reducing her to temporary despondence, 

• It was a little before he came to live at she wished to be released from the heavy load 

the cottage, signora,' replied Maddelina, 'and of life that had so long oppressed her, and 

that is about eighteen years ago.' prayed to Heaven to taike her, in its mercy, 

This was near the period when Signora to her parents. 
Laurentini had been said to disappear ; and Wearied with weeping, she at length lay 
it occurred to Emily that Marco had assisted down on her mattress and sunk to sleep, but 
in that mysterious affair, and, perhaps, had was soon awakened by a knocking at her 
been employed in a murder ! This horrible chamber-door, and, starting up in terror, she 
suggestion fixed her in such profound reverie, heard a voice calling her. The image of 
that Maddelina quitted the room unperccivcd Bertrand with a stiletto in his hand appeared 
by her ; and she remained unconscious of all to her alarmed fancy, and she neither opened 
around her for a considerable time. Tears at the door nor answered, but listened in pro- 
length came to her relief ; after indulging found silence, till, the voice repeating her 
which, her spirits becoming calmer, she name in the same low tone, she demanded 
ceased to tremble at a view of evils that might who called. 'It is I, signora,' replied the 
never arrive ; and had sufficient resolution to voice, which she now distinguished to be 

endeavour to withdrav/ her thoughts from the Maddclina's, ' pray open the door Don't 

contemplation of her own interests. Remcm- be frightened, it is I.' 

bering the f«w books which even in the hurry ' And what brings you here so late, Madde- 

of her departure from Udolplio she had put lina?' said Emily, as she let her in, 

into her little package, she sat down with one ' Hush ! signora, for Heaven's sake, hush I 

of them at her pleasant casement, whence — if we are overheard I shall never be for- 

her eyes often wandered from the page to the given. My father and mother and Bertrand 

landscape, whose beauty gradually soothed are all gone to bed,' continued Maddelina, as 

her mind into gentle melancholy. she gently shut the door and crept forward, 

Here she remained alone till evening, and and I have brought you some supper, for you 

saw the sun descend the western sky, through had none, you know, signora, below stairs, 

all his pomp of light and shadow upon the Here are some grapes and figs, and half a 

mountains, ^nd gleam upon the distant ocean cup of wine.' 

and the stealing sails, as he sunk amidst the Emily thanked her, but C3q)ressed appre- 

waves. Then, at the musing hour of twilight, hcnsion lest this kindness should draw upon 

her softened thoughts returned to Valan- her the resentment of Dorina, when she per- 

court ; she again recollected every circum- ccivcd the fruit was gone. ' Take it back, 

stance connected with the midnight music, therefore, Maddelina,' added Emily ; ' I shall 

and all that might assist her conjecture con- suffer much less from the want of it, than I 

cerning his imprisonment at the castle ; and should do, if this act of good-nature were to 

becoming confirmed in the supposition that subject you to your mother's displeasure.* 

it was hSs voice she had heard there, she 'O signora, there is no darker of that,' 

looked back to that gloomy abode, with emo- replied Maddelina, ' my mother cannot miss 

tions of grief and momentary regret. the fruit, for I saved it from my own supper. 

Refreshed by the cool and fragrant air, and You will make me very unhappy if you refuse 

her spirits soothed to a state of gentle melan- to take it, signora.' Emily was so much 

choly by the still murmur of the brook below affected by this instance of the good girl's 

and of the woods around, she lingered at her generosity, that she remained for some time 

casement long after the sun had set, watch- imable to reply ; and Maddelina watched her 

ing the valley sinking into obscurity, till only in silence, till, mistaking the cause of her 

tbcgzaod outline of the surrounding mo\m- cmox\Q>Ti«^\v& ^d, ' Do not weep so, signora ! 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 43 

My mother, to be sure, is a little cross some- sun threw his flaming rays athwart their 
times, but then it is soon over, — so don't take broken surface. Emily followed the course 
it so much to heart. She often scolds me, of the stream under the shades that overhung 
too ; but then I have learned to bear it ; and its grassy margin. On the opposite l^nks 
when she has done, if I can but steal out into the pastures were animated with herds of 
the woods, and play upon my sticcado, I for- cattle of a beL«utiful cream-colour ; and be- 
get it all directly. ' yond were groves of lemon and orange, with 

Emily, smiling through her tears, told Mad- fruit glowing on the branches, frequent sdmost 
delina that she was a good girl, and then ac- as the leaves which partly concealed it. She 
cepted her offering. She wished anxiously to pursued her way towards the sea, which re- 
know whether Bertrand and Dorina had fleeted the warm glow of sunset, while the 
spoken of Mo.*i .oni, or of his designs con- cliffs that rose over its edge were tinted with 
cerning herself, in the presence of Madde- the last rays. The valley was terminated on 
lina, but disdained to tempt the innocent girl the right by a lofty promontory, whose summit, 
to a conduct so mean as that of betraying impending over the waves, was crowned with 
the private conversation of her parents, a ruined tower, now serving for the purpose 
When she was departing Emily requested of a beacon, whose shattered battlements and 
that she would come to her room as often as the extended wings of some sea-fowl that 
she dared without offending her mother ; and circled near it, were still illumined by the up- 
Maddelina, after promising that she would do ward beams of the sun, though his disc was 
so, stole softly back again to her own chamber, now sunk beneath the horizon ; while the 

Thus several days passed, during which lower part of the ruin, the cliff on which it 

Emily remained in her own room, Maddelina stood, and the waves at its foot were shaded 

attending her only at her repast, whose gentle with the first tints of twilight, 
countenance and manners sootlied her more Having reached this headland, Emily gazed 

than any circumstance she had known for with solemn pleasure on the cliffs that extended 

many months. Of her pleasant embowered on either hand along the sequestered shores, 

chamber she now became fond, and began some crowned with groves of pine, and others 

to experience at it those feelings of security exhibiting only barren precipices of greyish 

which we naturally attach to home. In this marble, ex.cept where the crags were tufted 

interval also her mind, having been undis- with myrtle and other aromatic shrubs. The 

turbed by any new circumstance of disgust or sea slept in a perfect calm ; its waves, dying 

alarm, recovered its tone sufficiently to per- in murmurs on the shores, flowed with the 

rait her enjoyment of her books, among which gentlest undulation, while its clear surface 

she found some unfinished sketches of land- reflected in softened beauty the vermeil tints 

scapes, several blank sheets of paper, with of the west. Emily, as she looked upon the 

her drawing instruments ; and she was thus ocean, thought of France and of past times, 

enabled to amuse herself with selecting some and she wished, oh ! how ardently and vainly 

of the lovely features of the prospect that her wished I that its waves would bear her to her 

window commanded, and combining them in distant native home ! 

scenes to which her tasteful fancy gave a last 'Ah ! that vessel,' said she, * (hat vessel 

grace. In these litde sketches she generally which glides along so stately, with its tall 

placed interesting groups characteristic of the sails reflected in the water, is perhaps bound 

scenery they animated, and often contrived to for France ! Happy — ^happy bark f She 

tell, with perspicuity, some simple and affect- continued to gaze upon it, with warm emo- 

ing story, when, as a tear fell over the pic- tion, till the grey of twilight obscured the 

tured griefs which her imagination drew, she distance, and veiled it from her view. The 

would forget, for a moment, her real suffer- melancholy sound of the waves at her feet 

ings. Thus innocently she beguiled the assisted the tenderness that ocdasioned her 

heavy hours of misfortune, and with meek tears ; and this was the only sound that broke 

patience awaited the events of futurity. upon the hour, till, having followed the wind- 

A beautiful evening, that had succeeded to ings of the beach for some time, a chorus (6f 

a sultry day, at length induced Emily to voices passed her on the air. She paused a 

walk, though she knew that Bertrand must moment, wishing to hear more, yet fearing to 

attend her, and, with Maddelina for her com- be seen, and for the first time looked back to 

panion, she left the cottage followed by Ber- Bertrand, as her protector, who was foljowing 

trand, who allowed her to choose her own at a short distance in company wiUi some 

way. The hour was cool and silent, and she other person. Reassured by this circum- 

could not look upon the country around her stance, she advanced towards the sounds, 

without delight. How loveljr, too, appeared which seemed to arise from behind a high 

the brilliant blue that coloured all the upper promontory that projected githwart the beach, 

regions of air, and, thence fading downward. There was now a sudden pause in the music, 

was lost in the saffron glow of the horizon ! and then one female voice was heard to sing 

Nor less so were the varied shades and warm in a kind of chant. Emily quickened hex. 

colouring of the Apennines, as the evening steps, tijidy{iTV!diTv^\wmil>5aa\^^'5»j« 



44 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



in the sweeping bay beyond, which was hung which, set rather backward and on one side 
with woods from the borders of the beach to of the head, gave an ejpr^ion of gaiety and 
the very summit of the cliffs, two groups of smartness to the whole figure. When tiie 
peasants, one seated beneath the shades, and song had concluded, several of these giris 
the other standing on the edge of the sea, approached Emily, Md. mviting ner -to sit 
round the girl who was singing, and who down among them, offered her, and Madde- 
held in her hand a chaplet of flowers, which Una. whom they knew, grapes and figs, 
she seemed about to drop into the waves. Emily accepted their courtesy, much pleased 

Emily listening with surprise and attention, with the gentleness and grace of their man- 
distinguished the following invocation, de- ners, which appeared to be perfectly nattiral 
livered in the pure and elegant tongue of to them ; and when Bertrand, soon after, 
Tuscany, and accompanied by a few pastoral approached, and was hastily drawing her 
instruments. away, a peasant, holding up a flask, invited 

him to drink ; a temptation which Bertrand 
TO A SEA-NYMPH. ^^s seldom very valiant in resisting. 

O nymph ! who lovcst to float on the green wave, ' Let the young lady join in the dance, my 

When Neptune sleeps beneath the moon-light hour, friend,' said the peasant, * while we empty this 

Lull'd by the music^ melancholy power, flo^l' • t^**" «»»■*» omintr tn hf^cn'n Hir^ntlv Strilr*» 



O nymph, arise from out thy pearly cave ! 

For Hesper beams amid the twilight shade. 
And soon shall Cynthia tremble o'er the tide, 
Gleam on these cliffs, that bound the ocean's pride. 
And lonely silence all the air pervade. 

Then let thy tender voice at distance swell, 
And steal along this solitary shore. 
Sink on the breeze, till dying— heard no more — 
Thou wakest the sudden magic of thy shell. 

While the long coast in echo sweet replies. 
Thy soothing strains the pensive heart beguile. 
And bid the visions of the future smile, 
O nymph I from out thy pearly cave — arise I 

rChorus) Arise! 
(Semi-chorus) Arise! 



flask ; they are going to begin directly. Strike 
up ! my lads, strike up your tambourines and 
merry flutes !' 

They sounded gaily ; and the younger pea- 
sants formed themselves into a circle, which 
Emily would readily have joined, had her 
spirits been in unison with her mirth. Mad- 
delina, however, tripped it lightly ; and 
Emily, as she looked on the happy group, 
lost the sense of her misfortunes in that of a 
benevolent pleasure. But the pensive melan- 
choly of her mind returned, as she sat rather 
apart from the company, listening to the 
mellow music, which the breeze softened as it 



bore it away, and watching the moon stealing 
its tremulous hght over the waves and on the 
The last words being repeated by the sur- woody summits of the trees that wound along 
rounding group, the garland of flowers was these Tuscan shores. 

thrown into the waves, and the chorus, sink- Meanwhile Bertrand was so well pleased 

ing gradually into a chant, died away in silence, with his first flask, that he very willingly com- 

• What can this mean, Maddelina ?' said menced the attack on the second, and it was 



Emily, awakening from the pleasing trance 
into which the music had lulled her. ' This 
is the eve of a festival, signora,' rephed Mad- 
delina, ' and the peasants then amuse them- 
selves with all kinds of sports.* 

'But they talked of a sea-nymph,' said 



late before Emily, not without some appre- 
hension, returned to the cottage. 

After this evening she frequently walked 
with Maddelina, but was never unattended 
by Bertrand ; and her mind became by de- 
grees as tranquil as the circumstances of her 
Emily : ' how came these good people to think situation would permit. The quiet in which 
of a sea-nymph ?' she was suffered to live, encouraged her to 

* O, signora,' rejoined Maddelina, mistak- hope that she was not sent hither with an evil 
ing the reason of Emily's surprise, ' nobody design ; and had it not appeared probable 
believes in such things, but our old songs tell that Valancojirt was at this time an inhabi- 
tant of Udolpho, she would have wished to 
remain at the cottage till an opportunity 
should offer of returning to her native 
country. But concerning Montoni's motive 
for sending her into Tuscany she was more 
than ever perplexed, nor could she believe 
that any consideration for her safety had 
influenced him on this occasion. 

She had been some time at the cottage 
before she recollected that, in the hurry of 

had forgotten the 
her by her late aunt, 



of them, and when we are at our sports we 
sometimes sing to them, and throw garlands 
into the sea.' 

Emily had been early taught to venerate 
Florence as the seat of literature and of the 
fine arts ; but that its taste for classic story 
should descend to the peasants of the coun- 
try, occasioned her both surprise and admira- 
tion. The Arcadian air of the girls next 
attracted her attention. Their dress was a 
very short full petticoat of light green, with a leaving Udolplio, 
bodice of white silk ; the sleeves loose, and papers committed to 



she 



tied up at the shoulders with ribbons and relative to tlie Languedoc estates ; but, 

bunches of flowers. Their hair, falling in though this rememhnmce occasioned her 

ringlets on their necks, was also ornamented much uneasiness, she had some hope that, in 

with Sowers, and with a. smaU &Ud.>N l»aX( x\x% o\)^qncc% V^qq where they were de* 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



4S 



posited, they would escape the detection of 
Montoni. 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

' My tongue hath but a heavier tale to say. 
I play the torturer, by small and small, 
To lengthen out the worst that must be spoken.' 

Richard II. 

We now return for a moment to Venice, 
where Coimt Morano was suiSering under an 
accumulation of misfortunes. Soon after his 
arrival in that city he had been arrested by 
order of the senate, and, without knowing of 
what he was suspected, was conveyed to a 
place of confinement, whither the most strenu- 
ous inquiries of his friends had been unable 
to tmce him. Who the enemy was that had 
occasioned him this calamity he had not been 
able to guess, unless, indeed, it was Montoni, 
on whom his suspicions rested, and not only 
with much apparent probability, but with 
justice. 

In the affair of the poisoned cup, Montoni 
had suspected Morano ; but being unable to 
obtain the degree of proof which was neces- 
sary to convict him of a guilty intention, he 
had recourse to means of other revenge than 
he could hope to obtain by prosecution. He 
employed a person in whom he believed he 
might confide, to drop a letter of accusation 
into the denunzie secrete, or lions' mouths, 
which are fixed in a gallery of the doge's 
palace, as receptacles for anonymous iirfor- 
mation concerning persons who may be dis- 
affected towards the state. As, on these 
occasions, the accuser is not confronted with 
the accused, a man may falsely impeach his 
enemy, and accomplish an imjust rev«)ge, 
without fear of pimishment or detection. 
That Montoni should have rccoiu-se to these 
diabolical means of ruining a person whom 
he suspected of having attempted bis life, is 
not in the least surprising. In the letter 
which he had employed as the instrument of 
his revenge, he accused Morano of designs 
against the state, which he attempted to prove, 
with an the plausible simplicity of which' he 
was master ; and the senate, with whom a 
suspicion was, at that time, almost equal to a 
proof, arrested the count in consequence of 
this accusation ; and, without even hinting to 
him his crime, threw him into one of those 
secret prisons which were the terror of the 
Venetians, and in which persons ofteii lan- 
guished, and sometimes died, without being 
discovered by their friends. Morano had in- 
curred the personal resentment of many mem- 
bers of the state ; his habits of life had rendered 
him obnoxious to some ; and his ambition, 
and the bold rivalship which he discovered on 
several public occasions, — to others ; and it 
was not to be expected that mercy would soften 



the rigour of a law which was to bo dispensed 
from the hands of his enemies. 

Montoni, meantime, was beset by dangers 
of another kind. His castle was besieged 
by troops who seemed wiUing to dare every- 
thing, and to suffer patiently any hardships 
in piu^uit of victory. The strength of the 
fortress, however, wiUistood their attack ; and 
this, with the vigorous defence of the garrison 
and the scarcity of provision on these wild 
moimtains, soon compelled the assailants to 
raise the siege. 

When Udolpho was once more left to the 
quiet possession of Montoni, he dispatched 
Ugo into Tuscany for Emily, whom he had 
sent, from considerations of her personal 
safety, to a place of greater security than a 
castle which was, at that time, liable to be 
overrun by his enemies. Tranquillity t}eing 
once more restored to Udolpho, he was im- 
patient to secure her again under his roof, 
and had commissioned Ugo to assist Bertmnd 
in guarding her back to the castle. Thus 
compelled to return, Emily bade the kind 
Maddelina farewell, with regret ; and after 
about a fortnight's stay in Tuscany, where 
she had experienced an intcr\'al of quiet which 
was absolutely necessary to sustain her long- 
harassed spirits, began once more to ascend 
the Apennines, from whose heights she gave 
a long and sorrowful look to the beautiful 
country that extended at their feet, and to the 
distant Mediterranean, whose waves she had 
so often wished would bear her back to 
France. The distress she felt on her return 
towards the place of her former sufferings, 
was, however, softened by a conjecture that 
Valancourt was there ; and she found some 
degree of comfort in the thought of being 
near him, notwithstanding the consideration 
that he was probably a prisoner. 

It was noon when she had left the cottage, 
and the evening was closed long before she 
came within the neighbourhood of Udolpho. 
There was a moon, but it shone only at inter- 
vals, for the night was cloudy ; and lighted 
by the torch which Ugo carried, the travellers 
passed silently along, Emily musing on her 
situation, and Bertrand and Ugo anticipating 
the comforts of a flask of wine and a good 
fire, for they had perceived for some time the 
difference between the warm climate of the 
lowlands of Tuscany and the nipping air of 
these upper regions. Emily was at length 
roused from her reverie by the far-off sotmd 
of the castle-clock, to which she listened not 
without some degree of awe, as it rolled away 
on the breeze. Another and another note 
succeeded, and died in sullen murmur among 
the mountains : — to her moiunful imagination 
it seemed a knell measuring out some fatal 
period for her. 

' Aye, there is the old clock,* said Bertrand, 
' there he is still ; tlie cannons h^ve not silence4 
him !• 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



* No,' answered Ugo, ' he crowed as loud as 
the best of them in the midst of it all. There 
he was roaring out in the hottest fire I have 
seen this many a day 1 I said that some of 
them would have a hit at the old fellow, bat 
he escaped, and the tower too.' 

The road winding round the base of a 
mountain, they now came within view of the 
castle, which was shown in the perspective 
of the valley by a gleam of moonshine, and 
then vanished in shade ; while even a tran- 
sient view of it had awakened the poignancy 
of Emily's feelings. Its massy and gloomy 
walls gave her terrible ideas of imprisonment 
and suffering : yet, as she advanced, some 
degree of hope mingled with her terror ; for 
though this was certainly the residence of 
Montoni, it was possibly also that of Valan- 
court, and she could not approach a place 
where he might be, without experiencing some- 
what of the joy of hope. 

They continued to wind along the valley, 
and soon after she saw again the old walls and 
moonlit towers rising over the woods ; the 
strong rays enabled her also to perceive the 
ra\'ages which the siege had made — with the 
broken walls and shattered battlements ; for 
they were now at the foot of the steep on 
which Udolpho stood. Massy fragments had 
rolled down among the woods through which 
the travellers now l)egan to ascend, and there 
mingled with the loose earth and pieces of 
rock they had brought with them. The woods, 
too, had suffered much from the batteries 
above, for here the enemy had endeavoured 
to screen themselves from the fire of the 
ramparts. Many noble trees were levelled 
with the ground, and others, to a wide extent, 
were entirely stripped of their upper branches. 
'We had better dismount,' said Ugo, 'and 
lead the mules up the hill, or we shall get 
into some of the holes which the balls have 
left : here are plenty of them. Give me the 
torch,' continued Ugo, after they had dis- 
mounted, 'and take care you don't stumble 
over anything that lies in your way, for the 
ground is not yet cleared of the enemy.' 

' How !' exclaimed Emily, • are any of the 
enemy here, then?' 

' ^fay, I don't know for that, now,' he 
replied ; ' but when I came away I saw one 
or two of them lying under the trees.' 

As they proceeded, the torch threw a gloomy 
light upon the ground, and far among the 
recesses of the woods, and Emily feared to 
look forward, lest some object of horror 
should meet her eye. The path was often 
strewn with broken heads of arrows, and with 
shattered remains of armour such as at that 
period was mingled with the lighter dress of 
the soldiers. ' Bring the light hither, ' said Ber- 
trand, • I have stumbled over something that 
rattles loud enoiigh.' Ugo holding up the 
torch, they perceived a steel breast-plate on 
the ground, which Bertrand raised, and they 



saw that it was pierced through, and that the 
lining was entirely covered with blood ; but 
upon Emily's earnest entreaties that they 
would proceed, Bertrand, uttering^ some joke 
upon the unfortunate person to whom it had 
belonged, threw it hard upon the ground, and 
they passed on. 

At every step she took, Emily feared to see 
some vestige of death. Coming soon after to 
an opening in the woods, Bertrand stopped to 
sur\-ey the ground, which was encumbered 
with massy trunks and branches of the trees 
that had so lately adorned it, and seemed to 
have been a six>t particularly fatal to the 
besiegers ; for it was evident, from the des- 
truction of trees, that here the hottest fire of 
the garrison had been directed. As Ugo again 
held fordi the torch, steel glittered between 
the fallen trees, the ground beneath was 
covered with broken arms, and with the torn 
vestments of soldiers, whose mangled forms 
Emily almost expected to see ; and she again 
entreated her companions to proceed, who 
were, however, too intent in their examination 
to regard her, and she tiu-ned her eyes from 
this desolated scene to the castle above, where 
she obsened lights gliding along the ramparts. 
Presently the casde-clock struck twelve, and 
then a trumpet sounded, of which EmUy 
inquired the occasion. 

' O ! they are only changing watch.' replied 
Ugo. — ' I do not remember this trumpet,' 
said Emily ; ' it is a new custom. ' — ' ft is 
only an old one revived, lady ; we always use 
it in time of war. We liave soimded it, at 
midnight, c\'er since the place was besieged.* 

'Hark!!' said Emily, as the trumpet sounded 
again ; and in the next moment she heard a 
faint clash of arms, and then the watch-word 
passed along the terrace above, and was 
answered from a distant part of tlie castle ; 
after which all was again stilL She com- 
plained of cold, and begged to go on. ' Pre- 
sently, lady,' said Bertrand, turning over some 
broken arms with the pike he usually carried 
' What have we here ?' 

•Harkl' cried Emily, 'what noise was that? 

• What noise was it ?' said Ugo, starting up 
and listening. 

* Hush 1' repeated Emily. 'It surely came 
from the ramparts above ;' and on looking up, 
they perceived a light moving along the walls, 
while in the next instant, the breeze swelling, 
the voice sounded louder than before. 

' Who goes yonder?' cried a sentinel of the 
castle. • Speak, or it will be the worse for 
you. ' Bertrand uttered a shout of joy. • Ha 1 
my brave comrade, is it you ?' said he, and he 
blew a shrill whistle, which signal was answered 
by another from the soldier on watch ; and 
the party then passing fonvard, soon after 
emerged from the woods upon the broken 
road tliat led inimcdialcly to the castle gates, 
and Emily saw with renewed terror the whole 
of that stupendous structure. * Alaa I' said 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 47 

she to herself, ' I am going again into my the corpse of his fiiend T The Uttle Mmains 

prison !' of her fortitude now gave way to the united 

' Here has been warm work, by St. Marco 1' force of rememboied uid anticipated horrors, 

cried Bertrand, waving the torch over the for the melancholy fate of Madame Montoni 

ground ; ' the balls have torn up the earth hers appeared to foretell her own. She considered 

with a vengeance.' that, though the Languedoc estates, if she 

* Aye,' replied Ugo, *they were fired from relinquished them, would satisfy Montoni's 
that redoubt yonder, and rare execution they avarice, they might not appease his vengeance, 
did. The enemy made a furious attack upon which was seldom pacified but by a terrible 
the great gates ; but they might have guessed sacrifice ; and she even thoueht that, were 
they could never carry it there ; for, besides she to resign them, the fear of justice might 
the cannon from the walls, our archers on the y3x%^ him either to detain her d prisoner or to 
two round towers showered down upon them take away her life. 

at such a mte, that, by holy Peter I there was They were now arrived at the gates, where 
no standing it. I never saw a better sight in Bertrand, observing the Ught ghmmer throtu^h 
my life ; I laughed till my sides ached, to see a small casement of the portal-chamber, called 
how the knaves scampered. Bertrand, my aloud ; and the soldier, looking out, demanded 
good fellow, thou shouldst have been among who was there. ' Here, I have brought you a 
them : I warrant thou wouldst have won the prisoner,' said Ugo, 'open the gate, and let us 
race!' m.' 

' Hah ! you are at your old tricks again,* ' Tell me, first, who it is that demands en- 
said Bertrand in a surly tone. • It is well for trance,* replied the soldier. * What I my old 
thee thou art so near the castle ; thou knowest comrade,' cried Ugo, 'don't you know me? 
I have killed my man before now.' Ugo not know Ugo? I have brought homeapri- 
rephed only by a laugh, and then gave some soner here, bsund hand and foot — a fellow 
further account of Uie siege ; to which as who has been drinking Tuscany wine, while 
Emily listened, she was struck by the strong we here have been fighUng.* 
contrast of the present scene with that which ' You will not rest till you meet with your 
had so lately been acted here. match,' said Bertrand sullenly. ' Hah I my 

The mingled uproar of cannon, drums, and comrade, is it you ?' said the soldier — ' I'll be 
trumpets, the groans of the conquered, and with you directly.' 

the shouts of the conquerors, were now sunk Emily presently heard his steps descending 
into a silence so profound, that it seemed as if the stairs within, and then the heavy chain 
death had triumphed alike over the vanquished fall, and the bolts undraw of a small postern 
and the victor. The shattered condition of door, which he opened to admit the party, 
one of the towers of the great gates by no He held the lamp low, to show the step of 
means confirmed the t/a/2a»/ account justgiven the gate, and she found herself once more 
by Ugo of the scampering party, who, it was beneath the gloomy arch, and, heard the door 
evident, had not only made a stand, but had close that seemed to shut her' from the world 
done much mischief before they took to flight ; for ever. In the next mcMnent she was in the 
for this tower appeared, as far as Emily could first court of. the castle, where she surveyed the 
judge by the dim moonlight that fell upon spacious and solitary area with a kind of calm 
it, to be laid open, and the battlements were despair ; while the dead hour of the night, 
nearly demolished. While she gazed, a light the gothic gloom of the surrounding buildings, 
glimmered through one of the lower loop- and the hollow and imperfect echoes which 
holes, and disappeared; but in the next they returned as Ugo and the solcuer con- 
moment she perceived through the broken versed together, assisted to increase the mdan- 
wall a soldier, with a lamp, ascending the nar- choly forebodings of her heart. Passing on 
row staircase that wound within the tower ; to the second court, a distant sound broke 
and remembering that it was the same she feebly on the silence, and gradually swelling 
had passed up on the night when Bamardine louder as they advanced, Emily distinguished 
had deluded her with a promise of seeing voices of reveliy and laughter, but they were 
Madame Montoni, fancy gave her somewhat to her far other than sounds of joy. * Why, 
of the terror she had then suffered. She was you have got some Tuscany wine among yon, 
now very near the gates, over which the soldier htre* said Bertrand, ' if one may judge by the 
having opened the door of the portal-chamber, uproar that is going forward. Ugo has taken 
the lamp he carried gave her a dusky view of a larger share of that than of fignting, I'll be 
that terrible apartment, and she almost sunk sworn. Who is carousing at this late hour?* 
under the recollected horrors of the moment ' His ExcelUnza and the signors,' replied the 
when she had drawn aside the curtain and soldier : ' it is a sign you are a stranger at the 
discovered the object it was meant to eon- castle, or you would not need to ask the ques- 
ccal. tion. They are brave spirits that do wimout 

• Perhaps,' said she to herself, ' it is now sleep— they generally pass the night in good 
used for a similar purpose ; perhaps that cheer ; would that we, who keep the watch, 
soldier goes, at this dead hour, to watch over had a little of it I It is cold woik« ^?3fii&SL^^ 



48 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

xamparM so many hotirs of the night, if one and whfle she listeoed for her footstep, she 

has no good liquor to wann one's heart.' heard only distant sounds of revelry, whkh 

' Courage, my lad, courage ought to warm rose in sullen echoes from among- the arcades 

your heart,' said Ugo. 'Courage!' replied below. Once she thought she heard a low 

the soldier sharply, with a menacing air, sound from the dark gsdlery behind her ; and 

which Ugo perceiving prevented his sa3nng turning her eyes, fancied she saw something .. 

more, by returning to the subject of the luminous move in it ; and since she could not |j 

carousal. ' 'This is a new custom,' said he ; at this moment subdue the weakness that 

' when I left the castle, the signors used to sit caused her fears, she quitted her seat, and 

up counseUing. ' crept sofdy down a few stairs lower. 

'Aye, and for that matter, carousing too,* Annette not yet appearing, EmOynowoon- 

said Bertrand; 'but smce the siege, they have duded that she was gone to bed, and that 

done nothing but make merry : and if I was nobody chose to call her up ; and the prospect 

they, I- would settle accounts with myself, for that presented itself, of passing the night in 

all my hard fighting, the same way.' darkness in this place, or in some other equally 

They had now crossed the second court, forlorn (for she knew it would be impractic- 
and reached the hall door, when the soldier, able to find her way through the intricacies (tf 
bidding them good-night, hastened back to the galleries to her chamber), drew tears of 
his post; and while they waited for admit- mingled terror and despondency frx)m her eyes, 
tance, Emily considered how she might avoid While thus she sat, she fancied she heard 
seeing Montoni, and retire unnoticed to her again an odd soimd from the gallery, and sl^ 
former apartment, for she shrunk from the hstened, scarcely daring to breathe, but ^ 
thought of encoimtering either him or any of increasing voices below overcame every other 
his party at this hour. "The uproar within the sound. Soon after, she heard Montoni and 
casUe was now so loud, that, though Ugo his companions burst into the hall, who spoke 
knocked repeatedly at the hall-door, he was as if they were much intoxicated, and seemed 
not heard by any of the servants, a circum- to be advancing towards the staircase, ^on 
stance which increased Emily's alarm, while it now remembered that they must come this 
allowed her time to deliberate on the means way to their chambers, and, forgetting all the 
of retiring unobserved ; for though she might terrors of the gallery, hiuried towards it with 
perhaps pass up the great staircase unseen, it an intention of secreting hersdf in some of the 
was impossible she could find the way to her passages that opened beyond, and of en- 
chamber without a light, the difficulty of pro- deavouring, when the signors were retired, to 
curing which, and the danger of wandering find her way to her own room, or to that <rf 
about the casde without one, immediately Annette, which was in a remote ^gaxX, of the 
struck her. Bertrand had only a torch, and castle. 

she knew that the servants never brought a With extended arms she crept aloi^ the 

taper to the door, for the hall was sufficiently gallery, stUl hearing the voices of persons 

lighted by the laf-ge tripod lamp which hung below, who seemed to stop in conversation at 

in the vaulted roof ; and while she should the foot of the staircase ; and then pausing 

wait till Annette could bring a taper, Mon- for a moment to listen, half fearful of going 

toni or some of his companions might discover further into the darkness of the gallery, where 

her. she still imagined, from the noise she had 

The door was now opened by Carlo ; and heard, that some person was lurking — ' They 

Emily, having requested him to send Annette are already informed of my arrival,' said she, 

immediately with a light to the great gallery, ' and Montoni is coming himself to seek me! 

where she determined to await her, passed on In the present state of his mind, his purpose 

with hasty steps towards the staircase ; while must be desperate.' Then, recollecting the 

Bertrand and Ugo, with the torch, followed scene that had passed in the corridor on the 

old Carlo to the servants' hall, impatient for night preceding her departure fixjm the castle, 

supper and the warm blaze of a wood fu-e. ' O Valancourt ! ' said she, ' I must then resign 

Emily, lighted only by the feeble rays which you for ever. To brave any longer the in- 

the lamp above threw between the arches of justice of Montoni, would not be fortitude, 

this extensive hall, endeavoured to find her but rashness.' Still the voices below did not 

way to the staircase, now hid in obscurity ; draw nearer, but they became louder, and die 

while the shouts of merriment tliat burst from distinguished those of Vereza and Bertohni 

a remote apartment served, by heightening above the rest, while the few words she caught 

herterror, to increase her perplexity, and she ex- made her hsten more anxiously for others, 

pected every instant to see the door of that room The conversation seemed to concern herself ; 

open, and Montoni and his companions issue and having ventured to step a few paces nearer 

forth.. Having at length reached the staircase, to the staircase, she discovered that they were 

and found her way to the top, she seated her^ disputing about her, each seeming to daim 

self on the last stair to await the arrival of some former promise of Montoni, who ap- 

Annette ; for the profound darkness of the peared, at first, inclined to appease and to 

giilhry deterred her from prooeedmg lunliet ; persuade them to return to their wine, but 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 49 

afterwards to be weary of the dispute, and her strong surprise, and she felt a momentary 
sabring that he left them to settle it as they terror concerning it, which did not permit her 
could, was returning with the rest of the to look again, for her spirits were now in such 
party to the apartment he had just quitted, a state of weakness, that she almost expected 
Verezzi then stopped him. 'Where is she, to see the door slowly open and some horrible 
signor ?* said he in a voice of impatience : object appear at it. StiU she listened for a 
'tell us where she is.' ' I have already told step along the passage, and looked up it, 
you that I do not know,' replied Montoni, who where not a ray of light appearing, she con- 
seemed to be somewhat overcome with wine ; eluded that Verezzi had gone back for the 
• but she is most probably gone to her apart- lamp ; and believing that he would shortly be 
ment' Verezzi and Bertolini how desisted there, she again considered which way she 
from their inquiries, and sprang to the stair- should go, or rather which way she could find 
case together ; while Emily, who during this in the dark. 

discourse had trembled so excessively that she A faint ray still glimmered imder the oppo- 
had with difficulty supported herself, seemed site door ; but so great, and perhaps so just, 
inspired with new strength the moment she was her horror of that chamber, that she 
heard the bound of their steps, and ran along would not again have tempted its secrets, 
the gallery, dark as it was, with the fleetness though she had been certain of obtaining the 
of a fawn. But long before she reached its light so important to her safety. She was 
extremity, the light which Verezzi carried, still breathing with difficulty, and resting at 
flashed upon the walls ; both appeared, and, the end of the passage, when she heard a 
instantly perceiving Emily, pursued her. At rustling sound, and then a low voice so very 
this moment, Bertolini, whose steps though swift near her that it seemed close to her ear ; but 
were not steady, and whose impatience over- she had presence of mind to check her emo- 
came what little caution he had hitherto used, tions, and to remain quite still ; in the next 
stumbled, and fell at his length. The lamp moment she perceived it to be the voice of 
fell with him, and was presently expiring on Verezzi, who did not appear to know that she 
the floor ; but Verezzi, regardless of saving it, was there, but to have spoken to himself, 
seized the advantage this accident gave him ' The air is fresher here, 'said he : 'this should 
over his rival, and followed Emily, to whom, be the corridor.' Perhaps he was one of those 
however, the light had shown one of the pas- heroes whose courage can defy an enemy 
sages that branched from the gallery, and she better than darkness, and he tried to rally his 
instantly turned into it. Verezzi could just spirits with the sound of his own voice. How- 
discern the way she had taken, and this he ever this might be, he turned to the light, 
pursued : but the sound of her steps soon and proceeded with the same stealing steps 
sunk in distance ; while he, less acquainted towards Emily's apartment, apparenuy for- 
with the passage, was obliged to proceed getting that in darkness she coiUd easily elude 
through the dark with caution, lest he should his search, even in her chamber ; and, like 
fall down a flight of steps, such as in this an intoxicated person, he followed pertina- 
extensive old castle frequently terminated an ciously the one idea that had possessed his 
avenue. This passage at length brought Emily imagination. 

to the corridor into which her own chamber The moment she heard his steps steal away, 
opened ; and not hearing any footstep, she she left her station, and moved softly to the 
paused to take breath, and consider what was other end of the corridor,* determined to trust 
the safest design to be adopted. She had again to chance, and to quit it by the first 
followed this passage merely because it was avenue she could find : but before she could 
the first that appeared, and now that she had effect this, light broke upon the walls of the 
reached the end of it was as perplexed as gallery, and looking back, she saw Verezzi 
before. Whither to go, or how further to find crossing it towards her chamber. She now 
her way in the dark, she knew not ; she was glided into a passage that opened on the left, 
aware only that she must not seek her apart- without, as she thought, being perceived ; 
ment, for there she would certainly be sought ; but in the next instant, another light glimmer- 
and her danger increased every instant while ing at the further end of this passage threw 
she remained near it. Her spirits and her her into new terror. While she stopped and 
breath, however, were so much exhausted, hesitated which way to jgo, the pause allowed 
that she was compelled to rest for a few her to perceive that it was Annette who ad- 
minutes at the end of a passage, and still she vanced, and she hurried to meet her ; but her 
heard no steps approaching. As thus she imprudence again alarmed Emily, on per- 
stood, light glimmered under an opposite door ceiving whom she biu-st into a scream of joy, 
of the gallery, and fi'om its situation, she and it was some minutes before she could be 
knew that it was the door of that mysterious prevailed with to be silent, or to release her 
chamber where she had made a discovery so mistress from the ardent clasp in which she 
shocking that she never remembered it but held her. When, at length, Emily made An- 
with the utmost horror. That there should be nette comprehend her danger, they hurried 
light in this chamber, and at this hour, excited towards Annette's room, which was in. a. dis»- 



1 



50 THB MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 

tant part of the castle. No, apprehension, those fine ladies are at the castle still ; and t 
however, could yet silence the latter. ' Oh, declare I am frighted whenever I meet any of 

dear ma'amselle,' said she as they passed them in the passages ' 

along, ' what a terrified time havq I had of it ! ' Surely, Annette/ said Emily, starting, 'I 
Oh I I thought I should have died a hundred heard a noise : listen.——' After a lon^ 
times ! I never thought I should live to see pause, ' No, ma'amselle,' said Annette, ' it 
you again ! and I never was so glad to see was only the wind in the gallery ; I often hear 
anybody in my whole life, as I am to sec you it, when it shakes the old doors at the other 
now.' 'Hark!' cried Emily, 'we are pur- end. But won't you go to bed, ma'amselle? 
sued ; that was the echo of steps !' ' No, you surely will not set up starving, all night.' 
ma'amselle,' said Annette, ' it was only the Emily now laid herself down on the mattress, 
echo of a door shutting ; sound runs along and desired Annette to leave the lamp bum- 
these vaulted passages so, that one is con- ing on the hearth ; having done which, the 
tinually deceived by it : if one does but speak latter placed herself beside Emily, who, how- 
or cough, it makes a noise as loud as a cannon. ' ever, was not suffered to sleep, for she again 
' Then there is the greater necessity for us to thought she heard a noise from the passage ; 
be silent,' said Emily : ' Pr'ythee say no more and Annette was again trying to convince her 
till we reach your cl^miber. ' Here, at length, that it was only the wind, when footsteps were 
they arrived without interruption ; and An- distinctly heard near the door. Annette was 
nette having fastened the door, Emily sat now starting from the bed ; but Emily pre- 
down on her little bed, to recover breath and vailed with her to remain there, and listened 
composure. To her inquiry whether Valan- with her in a state of terrible expectation. 
court was among the prisoners in the castle. The steps still loitered at the door, when 
Annette replied that she had not been able to presently an attempt was made on the lock, 
hear, but that she knew there were several and in the next instant a voice called. * For 
persons confined. She then proceeded, in Heaven's sake, Annette, do not answer,* said 
ner tedious way, to give an account of the Emily softly, ' remain ouite still : but I fear 
siege, or rarther a detail of her terrors and we must extinguish the lamp, or its glare will 
various sufferings during the attack. 'But,' betray us.' 'Holy Virgin!' exclaimed An- 
added she, ' when I heard the shouts of vie- nette, forgetting her discretion, ' I would not 
tory from the ramparts, I thought we were all be in darkness now for the whole worid.' 
taken, and gave myself up for lost, instead of While she spoke, the voice became louder 
which, we had driven the enemy away. I than before, and repeated Annette's name ; 
went then to the north gallery, and saw a ' Blessed Virgin !* cried she suddenly, ' it is 
great many of them scampering away among only Ludovico.' She rose to open the door, 
me mountains ; but the rampart walls were but Emily prevented^ her, till they should be 
all in ruins, as one may say, and there was a more certam that it was he alone ; with whom 
dismal sight to see down among the woods Annette, at length, talked for some time, and 
below, where the poor fellows were lying in learned that he was come to inquire after ha^ 
heaps, but were carried off presently by their self, whom he had let out of her room to go 
comrades. While the siege was going on, to Emily, and that he was now returned to 
the signor was here, and there, and every- lock her in again. Emily, fearful of being over- 
where, at the same time, as Ludovico told me, heard if they conversed any longer through the 
for he would not let me see anything hardly, door, consented that it should be opened, and a 
and locked me up, as he had often done be- young man appeared, whose open countenance 
fore, in a room in the middle of the castle, confirmed the favourable opinion of him which 
and used to bring me food, and come and his care of Annette had already prompted 
talk \yith me as often as he could ; and I must her to form. She entreated his protection, 
say, if it had not been for Ludovico I should should Vcrezzi make this requisite ; and Ludo- 
have died outright.' vico offered to pass the night in an old chara- 

'Well, Annette,' said Emily, 'and how ber adjoining, that opened from the gallery, 
have affairs gone on since the siege ?' and on the first alarm to come to their defence. 

' O ! sad hiurly-burly doing, ma'amselle,' Emily was much soothed by this proposal ; 
replied Annette ; ' the signers have done and I^udovico, having lighted his lamp, went 
nothing biit sit and drink and game ever to his station, while she once more endea- 
since. They sit up all night, and play among voured to repose on her mattress. But a 
themselves for all those riches and fine things variety of interests pressed upon her attention, 
they brought in some time since, when they and prevented sleep. She thought much on 
used to go out a-robbing, or as good, for days what Annette had told her of the dissolute 
together ; and then they have dreadful Quar- manners of Montoni and his associates, and 
rels about who loses and who wins. That more of his present conduct towards herself, 
fierce Signor Verezzi is always losing, as they and of the clanger from which she had just 
tell me, and Signor Orsinowms from him, and escaped. From the view of her present 
thus makes him vciy wroth, and they have situation she shrunk, as from a new picture of 
had several batd set-to's about iu Then, all terror. She saw herself in a castle inhabited 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



SI 



by vice and violence, seated beyond the reach 
of law or justice, and in the power of a man 
whose perseverance was equal to every occa- 
sion, and in whom passions, of which revenge 
was not the weakest, entirely supplied the 
place of prfnciples. She was compelled once 
more to acknowledge, that it would be folly, 
and not fortitude, any longer to dare his 
power : and resigning all hopes of future 
happiness with Valancoiu-t, she determined 
that on the following morning she would com- 
promise with Montoni, and give up her estates, 
on condition that he would permit her imme- 
diate return to France. Such considerations 
kept her waking for many hours ; but the night 
passed without further alarm from Verezzi. 

On the next morning Emily had a long 
conversation with Ludovico, in which she 
heard circumstances concerning the castle, and 
received hints of the designs of Montoni that 
considerably increased her alarm. On ex- 
pressing her surprise, that Ludovico, who 
seemed to be so sensible of the evils of his 
situation, should continue in it, he informed 
her that it was not his intention to do so, and 
she then ventured to ask him if he would 
assist her to escape from the castle. Ludo- 
vico assured her of his readiness to attempt 
this, but strongly represented the difficulties 
of the enterprise, and the certain destruction 
which must ensue should Montoni overtake 
them before they had passed the mountains ; 
he, however, promised to be watchful of 
every circumstance that might contribute to the 
success of the attempt, aud to think upon 
some plan of departure. 

Emily now confided to him the name of 
Valancourt, and begged he would inquire for 
such a person among the prisoners in the 
castle ; for the faint hope which this conver- 
sation awakened, made her how recede from 
her resolution of an immediate compromise 
with Montoni. She determined, if possible, 
to delay this till she heard further from Ludo- 
vico ; and, if his designs were found to be 
impracticable, to resign the estates at once. 
Her thoughts were on this subject, when 
Montoni, who was now recovered from the 
intoxication of the preceding n^ht, sent for 
her, and she immediately obeved the sum- 
mons. He was alone. ' I iBnd , said he, ' that 
you were not in your chamber last night; 
where were you ?* Emily related to him some 
circumstances of her alarm, and entreated his 
protection from a repetition of them. ' You 
know the terms of my protection,' said he : 
' if you really Value this, you will secure it.* 
His open declaration, that he would only 
conditionally protect her while she remained 
a prisoner in the castle, showed Emily the 
necessity of an immediate comphance with his 
•terms ; but she first demanded whether he 
would permit her immediately to depart, if 
she gave up her claim to the contested estates. 
In a very solemn manner he then asstired her 



that he would ; and immediately laid before 
her a paper, which was to transfer the right 
of those estates to himself. 

She was for a considerable time unable to 
sign it, and her heart was torn with contend- 
ing interests, for she was about to resign the 
happiness of all her future years — the hope 
which had sustained her in so many hours of 
adversity. 

After hearing from Montoni a recapitulation 
of the conditions of her compliance, and a 
remonstrance that his time was valuable, she 
put her hand to the paper ; when she had 
done which, she fell l»ck in her chair, but 
soon recovered, and desired that he would 
give orders for her departure, and that he 
would allow Annette to accompany her. Mon- 
toni smiled. ' It was necessary to deceive 
you,' said he — 'there was no other way of 
making you act reasonably : you shall go, but 
it must not be at present. I must first secure 
these estates by possession ; when that is 
done, you may return to France if you will.' 

The deliberate villany with which he violated 
the solemn engagement he had just entered 
into, shocked Emily as much as the certainty 
that she had made a fruitless sacrifice, and 
must still remain his prisoner. She had no 
words to express what she felt, and knew 
that it would have been useless if she had. 
As she looked piteously at Montoni, he turned 
away, and at the same time desired she would 
withdraw to her apartment ;" but, unable to 
leave the room, she sat down in a chair near 
the door, and sighed heavily. She had neither 
words nor tears. 

• Why will you indulge this childish grief?' 
said he. * Endeavour to strengthen your mind 
to bear patiently what cannot be now avoided ; 
you have no real evil to lament ; be patient, 
and you will be sent back to B'rance. At pre- 
sent retire to your apartment.' 

• I dare not go, sir,' said she, 'where I shall 
be liable to the intrusion of Signor Verezzi.' 

• Have I not promised to protect you ?' said 
Montoni. • You have promised, sir, ' re- 
plied Emily, after some hesitation. *And is 
not my promise sufficient ?' added he sternly. 

• You will recollect your former promise, 
signor,' said Emily trembling, 'and may deter- 
mine for me whether I ought to rely upon 
this.' 'Will you provoke me to declare to 
you that I will not protect you then?* said 
Montoni in a tone of haughty displeasui^. 
' Withdraw to your chamber before I retract 
my promise ; vou have nothing to fear there.' 

• If that will satisfy you I will do it immediately.' 
Emily left the room, and moved slowly into 
the hall, where the fear of meeting Verezzi or 
Bertolini made her quicken her steps, though 
she could scarcely support herself; and soon 
after she reached once more her own apart- 
ment. Having looked fearfully round her to 
examine if any person was there, and having 
searched every part of it, she fastened the 



53 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

door, and sat down by one of the casements, she closed the casonent, and endeavoured to 
Here, while she looked out for some hope to await it in patience. The door of the stair- 
support her fainting spirits, which had been case she tried to secure, as usual, with some 
so long harassed and oppressed, that, if she of the furniture of the room ; but this expe- 
had not now struggled much against mis- dientherfearsnowrepresentedtohertobevery 
fortune, they would have left her perhaps for inadequate to the power and persev»ance of 
ever, she endeavoured to believe that Montoni Verezzi ; and she often looked at a large and 
did really intend to permit her retimi to heavy chest that stood in the chamber, with 
France as soon as he had secured her property, wishes that she and Annette had strength 
and that he would, in the mean time, protect to move it While she blamed the long stay 
her from insult : but her chief hope rested of this girl, who was still with Ludovico and 
with Ludovico, who, she 'doubted not, would some other of the servants, she trimmed her 
be zealous in her cause, though he seemed wood fire, to make the room app^ less deso- 
almost in despair of success in it. Onecircim:i- late, and sat down beside it with a book, 
stance, however, she had to rejoice in. Herpru- which her eyes perused, while her thoughts 
dence, or rather her fears, had saved her from wandered to Valancourt and her own misfor- 
mentioniqg the name of Valancourt to Mon- tunes. As she sat thus, she thought, in a pause 
toni, which she was several times on the point of the wind, she distinguished music, and 
of doing before she signed the paper, and of went to the casement to listen, but the loud 
stipulating for his release, if he should be swell of the gust overcame every other sound, 
really a prisoner in the casUe. Had she done When the wind sunk again, she heard dis- 
this, Montoni's jealous fears would now prob- tinctly, in the deep pause that succeeded, the 
ably have loaded Valancoiut with new seve- sweet strings of a lute ; but again the rising 
rities, and have suggested the advantage of tempest bore away the notes, and again was 
holding him a captive for life. succeeded by a solemn pause. Einily, trem- 

Thus passed the melancholy day, as she had bling with hope and fear, opened her casemoit 

before passed many in the same chamber, to listen, and to try whether her own voice could 

When night drew on, she would have with- be heard by the musician ; for to endure any 

drawn herself to Annette's bed, had not a par- longer this state of torturing suspense con- 

ticular interest inclined her to remain in this corning Valancourt, seemed to be uttorly 

cliamber, in spite of her fears : for when the impossible. There was a kind of breathless 

castle should be still, and the customary hour stillness in the chambers that permitted her 

arrived, she determined to watch for the music to distinguish from below the tender notes of 

she had formerly heard. Though its sounds the very lute she had formerly heard, and with 

might not enable her positively to determined it a plaintive voice, made sweeter by the low 

whether Valancourt was there, they would per- rustling sound that now^oegan to creep along 

haps strengthen her opinion that he was, and the wood-tops till it was lost in the rising wind, 

impart the comfort so necessary to her present Their tall heads then began to wave, while, 

support. But. on the other hand, if all should through a forest of pine on the left, the wind, 

be silent ! She hardly dared to suffer her groaning heavily, rolled onward over the 

thoughts to glance that way, but waited with woods below, bending them almost to their 

impatient expectation the approaching hoiu*. roots ; and as the long-resounding gale swept 

The night was stormy ; the battlements of away, other woods, on the right, seemed to 

the castle appeared to rock in the wind, and answer the ' loud lament ;' then others, 

at intervals long groans seemed to pass on further still, softened it into a murmiur that 

the au-, such as those which often deceive the died into silence. Emily listened wiA mingled 

melancholy mind in tempests and amidst awe and expectation, hope and fear ; and 

scenes of desolation. Emily heard, as for- again the melting sweetness of the lute was 

merly, the sentinels pass along the terrace to heard, and the same solemn-breathing voice, 

their posts, and looking out from her case- Convinced that these came from an apartment 

ment, observed that the watch was doubled ; underneath, she leaned far out of her window, 

a precaution which appeared necessary enough, that she might discover whether any light was 

when she threw her eyes on the walls, and saw there ; but the casements below, as well as those 

their shattered condition. The well-known above, were sunk so deep in the thick walls of 

sounds of the soldiers' march, and of their the castle, that she could not see them, or even 

distant voices, which passed her in the wind, tlie faint ray that probably gUmmered through 

and were lost again, recalled to her memory their bars. She then ventured to call ; but 

the melancholy sensation she had suffered the wind bore her voice to the other end of the 

when she formerly heard the same sounds, terrace, and then the music was heard as 

and occasioned almost involuntary compari- before, in the pause of the gust. Suddenly, 

sons between her present and her late situation, she thought she heard a noise in her chamber, 

But this was no subject for congratulation, and and she drew herself within the casement ; but 

she wisely checked the course of her thoughts, in a moment after, distinguishing Annette's 

while, as the hour was not yet come in which voice at the door, she concluded it \vas her 

i:hc had beea accustomed to hear iVve mu^c, s\iQ bad. Ueaxd before, and she let her in. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



53 



'Move softly, Annette, to the casement,' said 
she, ' and listen with me ; the music is re- 
turned.' They were silent, till, the measure 
changing, Annette exclaimed, ' Holy Virgin ! 
I know that song well ; it is a French song, 
one of the favourite songs of my dear country. 
This was the ballad Emily had heard on a 
former night, though not the one she had first 
listened to from the fishing-house in Gascony. 
' O ! it is a Frenchman that sings,' -said An- 
nette : 'it must be Monsieur Valancourt.' 
' Hark, Annette, do not speak so loud,* said 
Emily, ' we may be overheard. ' ' What ! by 
the chevalier ?* said Annette. * No, ' replied 
Emily mournfully, 'but by somebody who 
may report us to the signor. What reason 
have you to think it is Monsieur Valancourt 
who sings ? But hark ! now the voice swells 
louder ! Do you recollect those tones? I 
fear to trust my own judgment.' 'I never 
happened to hear the chevalier sing, made- 
moiselle,' replied Annette, who, as Emily was 
disappointed to perceive, had no stronger 
reason for concluding this to be Valancourt, 
than that the musician must be a Frenchman. 
Soon after, she heard the song of the fishing- 
house, and distinguished her own name, which 
was repeated so distinctly that Annette heard 
it also. She trembled, sunk into a chair by 
the window, and Annette called aloud, ' Mon- 
sieur Valancourt ! Monsieur Valancourt !' while 
Emily endeavoured to check her ; but she 
repeated the call more loudly than before, and 
tl» lute and the voice suddenly stopped. Emily 
listened for some time in a state of intolerable 
suspense ; but no answer being returned, ' It 
does not signify, mademoiselle,' said Annette ; 
• it is the chevalier, and I will speak to him. ' 
' No, Annette,' said Emily ; ' I think I will 
speak myself; if it is he, he will know my 
voice, and speak again.' 'Who is it,' said 
she, * that sings at this late hour ?' 

A long silence ensued ; and having repeated 
the qtiestion, she perceived some faint accents 
mingling in the blast that swept by ; but the 
sounds were so distant, and passed so sud- 
denly, that she could scarcely hear them, much 
less distinguish the words they uttered, or 
recognise the voice. After another pause, 
Emily called again ; and again they heard a 
voice, but as faintly as before ; and they per- 
ceived that there were other circumstances, be- 
sides the strength and direction of the wind, 
to contend with ; for the great depth at which 
the casements were fixed in the castle walls, 
contributed still more than the distance to 
prevent articulate sounds from being under- 
stood, though general ones were easily heard. 
Emily, however, ventured to believe, from the 
circiunstance of her voice alone having been 
answered, that the stranger was Valancourt, 
as well as that he knew her ; and she gave 
herself up to speechless joy. • Annette, how- 
ever, was not speechless. She renewed her 
calls, but received no answer ; and Emily, 



fearing that a further attempt, which certainly 
was at present highly dangerous, might expose 
them to the guards of the castle, while it 
could not perhaps terminate her suspense, in- 
sisted on Annette's dropping the inquiry for 
this night, though she determined herself to 
question Ludovico on the subject in the morn- 
ing more urgently than she had yet done. She 
was now enabled to say, that the stranger 
whom she had formerly heard was still in the 
castle, and to direct Ludovico to that part of 
it in which he was confined. 

Emily, attended by Annette, continued at 
the casement for some time, but all remained 
still ; they heard neither lute nor voice again ; 
and Emily was now as much oppressed by 
anxious joy, as she lately was by a sense of her 
misfortunes. With hasty steps she paced the 
room, now half-calling on Valancourt's name, 
then suddenly stopping, and now going to the 
casement and listening, where, however, she 
heard nothing but the solemn waving of the 
woods. Sometmies her impatience to speak 
to Ludovico prompted her to send Annette to 
call him ; but a sense of the impropriety of 
this at midnight restrained her. Annette 
meanwhile, as impatient as her mistress, went 
as often to the casement to listen, and re- 
turned almost as much disappointed. She at 
length mentioned Signor Verezzi, and her fear 
lest he should enter the chamber by the stair- 
case door. ' But the night is now almost 
past, mademoiselle,' said she, recollecting her- 
self ; ' there is the morning light beginning to 
peep over those mountains yonder, in the east' 

Emily had forgotten till this moment that 
such a person existed as Verezzi, and all the 
danger that had appeared to threaten her ; but 
the mention of his name renewed her alarm, 
and she remembered the old chest that she had 
wished to place against the door, which she 
now, with Annette, attempted to move, but it 
was so heavy that they could not lift it ^om 
the floor. ' What is in this great old chest, 
mademoiselle,' said Annette, ' that makes it so 
weighty?' Emily having replied that she found 
it in the chamber when she first came to the 
castle, and had never examined it — ' Then I 
will, mademoiselle,' said Annette, and she 
tried to lift the lid ; but this was held by a 
lock, for which she had no key, and which, 
indeed, appeared from its peculiar construction 
to open with a spring. The morning now 
glimmered through the casements, and the 
wind had sunk into a calm. Emily looked 
out upon the dusky woods, and on the twilight 
mountains, just stealing on the eye, and saw 
the whole scene, after the storm, lying in pro- 
found stillness, the woods motionless, and the 
clouds above, through which the dawn trem- 
bled, scarcely appearing to move along the 
heavens. One soldier was pacing the terrace 
beneath with measured steps ; and two, more 
distant, were sunk asleep on the walls, wearied 
with the aight'5 watgb, Having iahaJadLfe^^ 



54 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



while the pure spirit of the air, and of vegeta- 
tion, which the late rains had called forth ; 
and having listened, once more, for a note of 
music, she now closed the. casement and retired 
to rest 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

' Thus on the chill Lapponian's dreary land. 
For many a long montn lost in snow profound. 
When Sol from Cancer sends the seasons bland, 
And in their northern cave the storms hath bound ; 
From ulent mountains, straight, with startling 

soundp 
Torrents are hurl'd, green hills emerge, and lo. 
The trees with foliage, cliffe with flowers are 

crown'd ; 
Pure rills through vales of verdure warbling go ; 
And wonder, love, and joy, the peasant's heart 

o'erflow.' Beattib. 

Several of her succeeding days passed in 
suspense, for Ludovico could only learn from 
the soldiers that there was a prisoner in the . 
apartment described to him by Emily, and 
that he was a Frenchman, whom they had 
isOksn in one of the skirmishes with a party of 
his countrjrmen. During this interval, Emily 
escaped the persecutions of Bertolini and 
Verezzi, by confining herself to her apart- 
ment ; except that sometimes, in an evening, 
she ventured to walk in the adjoining corridor. 
Montoni appeared to respect his last promise, 
though he had profaned his first ; for to his 
protection only could she attribute her present 
repose ; and in this she was now secure, that 
she did not wish to leave the castle till she 
could obtain some certainty concerning Valan- 
court ; for which she waited, indeed, without 
any sacrifice of her own comfort, since no 
circumstance had occurred to make her escape 
probable. 

On the fourth day Ludovico informed her 
that he had hopes of being admitted to the 
presence of the prisoner ; it being the turn of 
a soldier with whom he had been for some 
time familiar, to attend him on the following 
night. He was not deceived in his hope ; for, 
under pretence of carrying in a pitcher of 
water, he entered the prison, though his pru- 
dence having prevented him from telling the 
sentind the real motive of his visit, he was 
obliged to make his conference with the pri- 
soner a very short one. 

Emily awaited tlic result in her own apart- 
ment, Ludovico having promised to accom- 
pany Annette to the corridor in the evening ; 
where, after several hours impatiently counted, 
he arrived. Emily having then uttered the 
name of Valancourt, could articulate no more, 
but hesitated in trembling expectation. ' The 
chevalier would not intrust me with his name, 
signora,' replied Ludovico ; ' but when I just 
mentioned yours, he seemed over\vhelmed 
with joy, though he ^vas not so much sur- 
imsed as I expected.' 
*Dofs he thenremcmberme? she exdaixaad. 



' O I it is Monrietir Valancourt.' said An- 
nette, and looked impatiently at Ludovico, 
who understood her look, and replied to 
Emily : ' Yes, lady, the chevalier does indeed 
remember you, and I am sure has a very 
great regard for you, and I made bold to say 
you had for him. He then inquired how you 
came to know he was in the castle, and 
whether you ordered me to speak to him. 
The first question I could not answer, but the 
second I did ; and then he went off into his 
ecstasies again. I was afraid Ins joy would 
have betrayed him to the sentinel at the door.' 

' But how does he look, Ludovico Y inter- 
rupted Emily : ' is he not melancholy and ill 
with his long confinement ?* — ' Why, as to 
melancholy, I saw no symptom of that, lady, 
while I was with him. for he seemed in the 
finest spirits I ever saw anybody in, in all my 
life. His countenance was all joy, and if one 
may judge from that, he was very well ; but 
I did not ask him.' ' Did he send me no 
message ?' said Emily. ' O yes, signora, and 
something besides,' replied Ludovico, who 
searched his pockets. ' Surely I have not lost 
it !' added he. ' The chevalier said he would 
have written, madam, if he had had pen and 
ink, and was going to have sent a very long 
message, when the sentinel entered the room. 
but not before he had given me this.' Ludo- 
vico then drew forth a miniature from his 
bosom, which Emily received with a trembling 
hand, and perceived to be a portrait of hersdf 
— the very picture which her mother had lost 
so strangely in the fishing-house at La Vaflfe. 

Tears of mingled joy and tenderness flowed 

to her eyes, while Ludovico proceeded 

' ' ' Tell your lady, "said the chevalier as he gave 
me the picture, " that this has been my com- 
panion and only solace in all my misfortunes. 
TeU her that I have worn it next my heart, 
and that I send it her as the pledge of an 
affection which can never die ; that I would 
not part with it, but to her, for the wealth of 
worlds ; and that I now part with it, only in 
the hope of soon receiving it from her hands. 

Tell her " Just then, signora, the sentinel 

came in, and the chevalier said no more : 
but he had before asked me to contrive an 
interview for him with you ; and when I told 
him how little hope I had of prevailing with 
the guard to assist me, he said that was not 
perhaps of so much consequence as I imagined, 
and bade me contrive to bring back your 
answer, and he would inform me of more than 
he chose to do then. So this, I think, lady, 
is the whole of what passed.' 

' How, Ludovico, shall I rc\%"ard you for 
your zeal ?' said Emily : * but indeed I do 
not now possess the means. When can you 
see the chevalier again ?* ' That is uncertain, 
signora,' replied he : ' it depends upon who 
stands guard next ; there are not more than 
OT^^ OT two among them, from whom I would 



THB MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



55 



* I need not bid you remember, Ludovico,' rezzi. The cause of them, however, appeared 
resumed Emily, ' how very much interested to be of little consequence ; for she thought 
I am in your seeing the chevalier soon ; and she saw destruction approaching in many 
when you do so, tell him that I have received forms, and her entreaties to Ludovico to 
the picture, and with the sentiments he wished, contrive an escape, and to see the prisoner 
Tell him I have suffered much, and still again, were more urgent than ever, 
suffer.' — She paused. 'But shall I tell him At length, he informed her that he had 
you will see him, lady?' said Ludovico. ' Most again visited the chevalier, who had directed 
certainly I will,' replied Emily. ' But when, him to confide in the guard of the prison, from 
signora, and where Y * That must depend whom he had already received some instances 
upon circumstances,' returned Emily : ' the of kindness, and who had promised to permit 
place and the hour must be regulated by his his going into the castle for half an hour on 
opportunities.' the ensuing night, when Montoni and his 

'As to the place, mademoiselle,' said An< companions should be engaged at their 
nette, 'there is no other place in the castle, carousals. 'This was kind, to be sure,' added 



besides this corridor, where we can see him 
in safety, you know ; and as for the hour — it 
must be when all the signors are asleep, if 



Ludovico : ' but Sebastian knows he runs no 
risk in letting the chevalier out, for if he can 
get beyond the bars and iron doors of the 



that ever happens !' ' You may mention these castle, he must be cunning indeed. But the 

circumstances to the chevalier, Ludovico,' chevalier desired me, signora, to go to you 

said she, checking the flippancy of Annette ; immediately, and to beg you would allow him 

'■ and leave them to his judgment and oppor- to visit you this night, if it was only for a 

tunity. Tell him my heart is unchanged, moment, for that he cojuld no longer live under 

But, above all, let him see you again as soon the same roof without seeing you ; the 

as possible ; and, Ludovico, I think it is hour,' he said, he could not mention, for 

needless to tell you I shall very anxiously it must depend on circumstances (just as you 

look for you.' Having then wished her gooa said, signora) ; and the place he desired you 

night, Ludovico descended the staircase, and would appoint, as knowing which was best 

Emily retired to rest, but not to sleep, for joy for your own safety. ' 

now rendered her as wakeful as she had ever Emily was now so much agitated by the 

been from grief. Montoni and his castle had near prospect of meeting Valancourt, that it 

all vanished from her mind, like the frightful was some time before she could give any 

vision of a necromancer, and she wandered answer to Ludovico, or consider of the place 

once more in fairy scenes of unfading hap- of meeting ; when she did, she saw none that 



pmess : 

' as when, benrath the beam 

Of Slimmer moons, the distant woods among. 
Or by some flood all silver'd with the gleam. 
The soft embodied Fays through airy portals 
stream.' 



promised so much security as the corridor near 
her own apartment, which she was checked 
from leaving, by the apprehension of meeting 
any of Montoni's guests on their way to their 
rooms ; and she (Ssmissed the scruples which 
delicacy opposed, now that a serious danger 
Ludovico again was to be avoided by encountering them. It 



A week elapsed before 

visited the prison ; for the sentinels during was settled, therefore, that the chevalier should 
that period were men in whom he could not meet her in the corridor, at that hour of the 

confide, and he feared to awaken curiosity by night which Ludovico, who was to be upon 

asking to see their prisoner. In this interval the watch, should judge safest : and Emily, 
he communicated to Emily terrific reports of as may be imagined, passed this interval in a 

what was passing in the castle ; of riots, tumult of hope and joy, anxiety and impa- 

quarrels, and of carousals more alarming than tience. Never since her residence in the castle 

either ; while, from some circumstances which had she watched with so much pleasure the 

he mentioned, she not only doubted whether sun set behind the mountains, and twilight 

Montoni meant ever to release her, but greatly shade and darkness veil the scene, as on this 

feared that he had designs concerning her evening. She counted the notes of the great 

— such as she had formerly dreaded. Her clock, and hstened to the steps of the sentinels 

name was frequently mentioned in the con- as they changed the watch, only to rejoice 

versations which Bertolini and Verezzi held that another hoiu* was gone. ' O Valancourt I' 

together, and at those times they were fre- said she, ' after all I have suffered ; after our 

quently in contention. Montoni had lost long, long separation, when I thought I 

large sums to Verezzi, so that there was a should never — never see you more— we are 

dreadful possibility of his designing her to be still to meet again 1 Oil have endured grief, 

a substitute for the debt ; but as she was and anxiety, and terror, and let me then not 

ignorant that he had formerly encouraged the sink beneath this jo^ 1' These were moments 

hopes of Bertolini also, concerning herself, when it was impossible for her to feci emotions 

after the latter had done him some signal of regret or melancholy for any ordinary 

service, she knew not how to account for interests — even the reflection that she haa 

these contentions between Bertolini and Ve- resigned the estates which. Nicwid. \fflN^\*«^ 



S6 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



a provision for herself and Valancourt for life, 
threw only a light and transient shade upon 
her spirits. The idea of Valancourt, and that 
she should see him so soon, alone occupied 
her heart. 

At length the clock struck twelve ; she 
opened the door to listen if any noise was in 
the castle, and heard only distant shouts of 
riot and laughter echoed feebly along the 
gallery. She guessed that the- signor and his 
guests were at the banquet. ' They are now 
engaged for the night,' said she ; ' and Valan- 
court will soon be here. ' — Having softly closed 
the door, she paced the room with impatient 
steps, and often went to the casement to listen 
for the lute ; but all was silent ; and her agita- 
tion every moment increasing, she was at 
lengt\)i unable to support herself, and sat down 
by the window. Annette, whom she detained, 
was in the mean time as loquacious as usual ; 
but Emily heard scarcely anything she said ; 
and having at length risen to the casement, 
she distinguished the chords of the lute struck 
with an expressive hand, and then the voice 
she had formerly listened to accompanied it. 

* Now rising love they fann'd, now pleasing dole 
They breathed in tender musings through the 

heart ; 
And now a graver, sacred strain they stole, 
As when seraphic hands an hymn impart 1 

Emily wept in doubtful joy and tenderness ; 
and when the strain ceased, she considered it 
as a signal that Valancourt was about to leave 
the prison. Soon after she heard steps in the 
corridor ; — they w ere the light quick steps of 
hope ; she could scarcely support herself 
as they approached; but, opening the door 
of the apartment, she advanced to meet 
Valancourt, and in the next moment sunk in 
the arms of a stranger. His voice — his coun- 
tenance instantly convinced her, and she fainted 
away. 

On reviving, she found herself supported by 
the stranger , who was watching over her recovery 
with a countenance of ineffable tenderness and 
anxiety. She had no spirits for reply, or in- 
quiry ; she asked no questions, but burst into 
tears, and disengaged herself from his arms ; 
when the expression of his countenance changed 
to surprise and disappointment, and he turned 
to Ludovico for an explanation. Annette soon 
gave the information, which Ludovico could 
not. ' O, sir ! ' said she, in a voice interrupted 
with sobs ; ' O, sir, you are not the other che- 
valier. We expected Monsieur Valancourt, 
but you are not he ! O Ludovico ! how could 
you deceive us so ? my poor lady will nevdr 
recover it — never ! ' The stranger, who now 
appeared much agitated, attempted to speak, 
but his words faltered ; and then striking his 
hand against his forehead, as if in sudden 
despair, he walked abruptly to the other end 
of the corridor. 
Suddenly Annette dried her tears, and spoke 
to Ludovico, ' But perhaps,' sjdd she, ' alxet 



all, the other chevalier is not this : perhaps the 
chevalier Valancourt is still below.' Emily 
raised her head. ' No,' replied Ludovico, 
' Monsieur Valancomrt never was below, if this 

gentleman is not he. If you, sir,' said 

Ludovico, addressing the stranger, 'would 
but have had the goodness to trust me with 
your name, this mistake had been avoided.' 
' Most true,' replied the stranger, speaking in 
broken Italian ; ' but it was of the utmost 
consequence to me that my name shoidd be 
concealed fromMontoni. — Madam,' added he, 
then addressing Emily in French, 'will you 
permit me to apologise for the pain I have 
occasioned you, and to explain to you alone 
my name, and the circumstance that has led 
me into this error? I am of France; — I am 
your countryman ; — we are met in a foreign 
land. ' Emily tried to compose her spirits ; yet 
she hesitated to grant his request. At length, 
desiring that Ludovico would wait on the 
staircase, and detaining Annette, she told the 
stranger that her woman understood verylittle 
of Italian, and begged he would commtmicate 
what he wished to say in that language. — 
Having withdrawn to a distant part of the 
corridor, he said, with a long-drawn sigh, 
' You, Madam, are no stranger to me, ihoi^ 
I am so unhappy as to be unknown to you. — 
My name is Du Pont ; I am of France, d 
Gascony, your native province, and have long 
admired, — and why should I affect to disguise 
it ? — have long loved you. ' He paused, but in 
the next moment proceeded. *My family, 
madam, is probably not unknown to you, for 
we lived within a few miles of La Vall^, and 
I have sometimes had the happiness of meet- 
ing you on visits in the neighbourhood. I will 
not offend you by repeating how much you 
interested me ; how much I loved to wander 
in the scenes you frequented ; how often I 
visited your favourite fishing-house, and la- 
mented the circumstance which at that time 
forbade me to reveal my passion. I will not 
explain how I surrendered to temptation, and 
became possessed of a treasure which was to 
me inestimable; a treasure, which I com- 
mitted to your messenger a few days ago, with 
expectations very different from my present 
ones. I will say nothing of these circum- 
stances, for I know they would avail me litde ; 
let me only supplicate for your forgiveness, 
and the picture which I so unwarily returned. 
Your generosity will pardon the theft, and 
restore the prize. My crime has been my 
punishment ; for the portmit I stole has con- 
tributed to nourish a passion which must stfll 
be my torment.' 

Emily now interrupted him. * I think, sir, 
I may leave it to your integrity to determine, 
whether, after what has just appeared con- 
cerning Mons. Valancourt, I ouglit to return 
the picture. I think you will acknowledge 
that this would not be generosity ; and you 
vnWaNVo^N xatx<i ^^^vViax it would be doing 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 57 

myself an injustice. I must consider myself • O you are lost ! ' cried she ; ' these are 

honoured by your good opinion, but — and she Montoni's people.' Du Pont made no reply, 

hesitated — the mistake of this evening makes but supported Emily, while with a steady 

it unnecessary for me to say more.' though eager countenance he waited their ap- 

' It does, madam, — alas ! it does !* said the pearance, and in the next moment Ludovico 

stranger, who, after a long pause, proceeded, alon^ mounted tJbe landing-place. Throwing 

-—' But you will allow me to show my dis- a hasty glance round the chamber, ' Follow 

interestedness, though not my love, and will me,' said he, 'as you value your lives ; we have 

accept the services I offer. Yet, alas ! what not an instant to lose ! ' 

services can I offer ? I am myself a prisoner, Emily inquired what had occurred, and 

a sufferer like you. But dear as liberty is to whither they were to go. 

me, I would not seek it through half the ' I cannot stay to tell you now, signora,' 

hazards I would encounter to deliver you from replied Ludovico : ' fly ! fly 1 ' 

this recess of vice. Accept the offered services She immediately followed him, accompanied 

of a friend ; do not refuse me the reward of hav- by Monsieiu- du Pont, down the staircase, and 

ing at least attempted to deserve your thanks, along a vaulted passage, when suddenly she 

'You deserve them already, sir, said Emily ; recollected Annette, and inquired for her. 
'the wash deserves ray warmest thanks. But 'She awaits us further on, signora,' said 
you will excuse me for reminding you of the Ludovico, almost breathless with haste : ' the 
danger you incur by prolonging this interview, gates were open, a moment since, to a party 
It will be a great consolation to me, to remember, just come in from the mountains ; they will be 
whether your friendly attempts to release me shut, I fear, before we can reach them! Through 
succeed or not, that I have a countryman who this door, signora,' added Ludovico, holding 
would so generously protect me.' — Monsieur down the lamp; 'take care, here are two steps.' 
du Pont took her hand, which she but feebly Emily followed, trembling still more than 
attempted to withdraw, and pressed it respect- before she had imderstood that her escape 
fully to his lips. 'Allow me to breathe another from the castle depended on the present mo- 
fervent sigh for your happiness,' said he, ' and ment ; while Du Pont supported her, and en- 
to applaud myself for an affection which I deavoured, as they passed along, to cheer her 
cannot conquer. ' As he said this, Emily heard spirits. 

a noise from her apartment, and, turning ' Speak low, signer,' said Ludovico, ' these 
round, saw the door from the staircase open, passages send echoes all round the castie.' 
and a man rush into' her chamber. ' I will ' Take care of the hght,' cried Emily, ' you 
teach you to conquer it,' cried he, as he ad- go so fast that the air will extinguish it.' 
vanced into the corridor, and drew a stiletto, Ludovico now opened another door, where 
which he aimed at Du Pont, who was un- they found Annette ; and the party then de- 
armed, but who stepping back, avoided the scended a short flight of steps into a passage, 
blow, and then spnmg upon Verezzi, from which, Ludovico said, led round the inner court 
whom he wrenched the stiletto. While they of the castle, and opened into the outer one. 
struggled in each other's grasp, Emily, fol- As they advanced, confused and tumultuous 
lowed by Annette, ran further into the corridor, sounds, that seemed to come from the inner 
calling on Ludovico, who was, however, gone court, alarmed Emily. 'Nay, signora,' said 
from the staircase ; and as she advanced, Ludovico, ' our only hope is in that tumult ; 
terrified and uncertain what to do, a distant while the signor's people are busied about the 
noise that seemed to arise from the hall, re- men who are just arrived, we may perhaps pass 
minded herofthedangershewasincurring; and unnoticed through the gates. But hush !* he 
sending Annette forward in search of Ludo- added, as they approached the small door that 
vico, she returned to the spot where Du Pont opened into the outer court ; ' if you will remain 
and Verezzi were still struggling for victory, here a r^ment, I will go to see whether the 
It was her own cause which was to be decided gates are open, and anybody is in the way. 
with that of the former, whose conduct inde- Pray extinguish the light, signor, if you hear 
pendently of this circumstance, would, however, me talking, ' continued Ludovico, delivering the 
have interested her in his success, even had lamp to Du Pont, 'and remain quite still.' 
she not disliked and dreaded Verezzi. She Saying this, he stepped out upon the court, 
threw herself in a chair, and supplicated them and they closed the door, listening anxiously 
to desist from further violence, till at length to his departing steps. No voice, however, 
Du Pont forced Verezzi to the floor, where he was heard in the court which he was crossing, 
lay stunned by the violence of his fall ; and , though a confusion of many voices yet issued 
she then entreated Du Pont to escape from from the inner one. ' We shaU soon be be- 
the room, before Montoni or his party should yond the walls, 'said Du Pont, softly, to Emily ; 
appear : but he still refused to leave her im- ' support yourself a little longer, madam, and 
protected ; and while Emily, now more tern- all will be well.' 

tied for him than for herself, en^rced the en- But soon they heard Ludovico speaking 

treaty, they heard steps ascending the private loud, and the voice also of some other person, 

staircase. and Du Pont immediately extioJBais&sA "Cass. 



58 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



limp. ' Ah ! it is too late !' exclaimed Emily— 
•what is to become of us?* They listened 
again, and then perceived that Ludovico was 
t^ng with a sentinel, whose voices were 
heard also by Emily's favourite dog, that had 
followed her from the chamber, and now barked 
loudly. • This dog will betray us I' said Dn 
Pont, 'twill hold him.' 'I fear he has al- 
ready betrayed us l' replied Emily. Du Pont, 
however, caught him up, and again listening 
to what was going on without, they heard 
Ludovico say, ' I'll watch the gates the while.' 

•Stay a minute,' replied the sentinel, 'and 
you need not have the trouble ; for the horses 
will be sent round to the outer stables, then 
the gates will be shut, and I can leave my 
post.' ' I don't mind the trouble, comrade,* 
said Ludovico, 'you will do such another 
good turn for me, some time. Go — go, and 
fetch the wine ; the rogues that are just come 
in will drink it all else.' 

The soldier hesitated, and then called aloud 
to the people in the second court to know why 
they aid not send out the horses, that the 
gates might be shut ; but they were too much 
engaged to attend to him, even if they had 
heard his voice. 

'Aye — aye,' said Ludovico, 'thev know 
better than Uiat ; they are sharing it all among 
them. If you wait till the horses come out, 
you must wait till the wine is drunk. I have 
had my share already ; but, since you do not 
care about yours, I see no reason why I should 
not have thit too.' 

' Hold, hold ; not so fast,' cried the sen- 
tinel ; ' do watch then for a moment ; I'll be 
withyou presently.' 

' Don't hurry yourself,' said Ludovico 
coolly ; • I have kept guard before now. But 
you may leave me your trombone* that if 
the castle should be attacked, you know, I 
may be able to defend the pass like a hero.' 

' There, my good fellow,' retiuned the sol- 
dier; 'there, take it — it has seen service, 
though it could do little in defending the 
castle. I'll tell you a good story, though, 
about this trombone.' 

' You'll tell it better when you have had the 
wne,* said Ludovico. ' They are coming out 
from the court already.' 

' I'll have the wine, though,' said the sen- 
tinel, running off: ' I won't keep you a minute.' 

' Take your time, I am in no haste,' replied 
Ludovico, who was already hurrying across 
the court when the soldier came back. 
'Whither so fast, friend — whither so fast?' 
said the latter. ' What I is this the way you 
keep watch ? I must stand to my post my- 
self, I see.' 

'Aye, well,' replied Ludovico, 'you have 
saved me the trouble of following you fur- 
ther; for I want to tell you, if you have a 
wmd to drink the Tuscany wine, you must go 
to Sebastian, he is dealing it out ; the other 
* A icind of blunderbuss. 



that Fredrico has, is not worth havin?. But 
you are not likely to have any, I see, for they 
arc all coming out.' 

' By St. Peter, so they are,' said the soldier, 
and again ran off; while Ludovico, once more 
at liberty, hastened to the door of the pas- 
sage, where Emily was sinking under the 
anxiety this long discourse had occasioned ; 
but on his telling them the court was clear, 
they followed him to the gates, without wait- 
ing another instant; yet not before he had 
seized two horses that had strayed from the 
second court, and were picking a scanty meal 
along the grass which grew between the pave- 
ment of the first. 

They passed without interruption the dread- 
ful gates, and took the road that led down 
among the woods, Emily, Monsieur du Pont, 
and Annette on foot, and Ludovico, who was 
mounted on one horse, leading the other. 
Having reached them, they stopped while 
Emily and Annette were placed on horseback 
with their two protectors ; when, Lmdovico 
leading the way, they set off as fast as the 
broken road, and the feeble light which a rising 
moon threw among the foliage, would permit 

Emily was so much astonished by this sud- 
den departure, that she scarcely dared to be- 
lieve herself awake ; and she yet much doubted 
whether this adventure would terminate in 
escape — a doubt which had too much pro- 
bability to justify it ; for before they quitted 
the woods, they heard shouts in the wind, 
and, on emerging from them, saw lights 
moving quickly near the castle above. Du 
Pont whipped his horse, and with some diffi- 
culty compelled him to go faster. 

'Ah! poor beast,' said Ludovico, 'he is, 
weary enough ; he has been out all day : but, 
Signer, we must fly for it, now ; for yonder 
are the lights coming this way. ' 

Having given his own horse a lash, they 
now both set off on a full gallop ; and when 
they again looked back, the lights were so 
distant as scarcely to be discerned, and the 
voices were sunk into silence. The travellers 
then abated their pace ; and, consulting 
whither they should direct their course, it was 
determined they should descend into Tus- 
cany, and endeavour to reach the Mediter- 
ranean, where they could readily embark for 
France. Thither Du Pont meant to attend 
Emily, if he should learn that the regiment he 
had accompanied into Italy was retiuned to 
his native country. 

They were now in the road which Emily 
had travelled with Ugo and Bertrand ; but 
Ludovico, who was the only one of the party 
acquainted with the passes of these moun- 
tains, said that a little further on, a by- 
road branching from Uiis, would lead them 
down into Tuscany with very little difficiUty ; 
and that at a few leagues distance was a small 
town where necessaries could be procured for 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO, 59 

' But I hope,' added he, ' we shall meet ance, sunk again into silence. Annette was 
with no straggling parties of banditti ; some the first who intenupted this. ' Holy Peter 1' 
of them are abroad, I know. However, I said she, ' what shall we do for money on our 
have got a good trombone, which will be of journey? for I know neither I nor my lady 
some service if we should encounter any of have a single sequin ; the signor took care 
those brave spirits. You have no arms, signor?* of that 1' 

•Yes,' replied Du Pont ; ' I have the villain's This remark produced a serious inquiry, 
stilleto, who would have stabbed me. But which ended in as serious an embarrassment, 
let us rejoice in our escape from Udolpho, for Du Pont had been rifled of nearly all his 
nor torment ourselves with looking out for money when he was taken prisoner ; the re- 
dangers that may never arrive.' mainder he had given to the sentinel who 
The moon was now risen high over the had enabled him occasionally to leave the 
woods that hung upon the sides of the nar- prison chamber ; and Ludovico, who had for 
row glen through which they wandered, and some time found a difficulty in procuring any 
afforded them light sufficient to distinguish part ofthe wages due to him, had now scarcely 
their way, and to avoid the loose and broken cash sufficient to procure necessary refresh- 
stones that frequently crossed it. They now ment at the first town in which they should 
travelled leisurely, and in profound silence ; arrive. 

for they had scarcely yet recovered from the Their poverty was the more distressing, 
astonishment into which this sudden escape since it would detain them among the moun- 
had thrown them. Emily's mind, especially, tains, where, even ina town, they could scarcely 
was sunk, after the various emotions it had consider themselves safe from Montoni. The 
suffered, into a kind of musing stillness, travellers, however, had only to proceed and 
which the reposing beauty of the surrounding dare the future ; and they continued their way 
scene, and the creeping murmur of the night- through lonely wilds and dusky valleys, wJiere 
breeze among the foliage above, contributed the overhanging foliage now admitted and 
to prolong. She thought of Valancourt and then excluded the moonlight ; wilds so deso- 
of France with hope ; and she would have late, that they appeared on the first glance as 
thought of them with joy, had not the first if no human being had ever trod them before. 
events of this evening harrassed her spirits Even the road in which the party were did 
too much to permit her now to feel so lively a but slightly contradict this error ; for the high 
sensation. Meanwhile, Emily was alone the ob- grass and other luxuriant vegetation with 
ject of Du Pont's melancholy consideration ; which it was overgrown, told how very seldom 
yet, with the despondency he suffered, as he the foot of a traveller had passed it 
mused on his recent disappointment, was min- At length, from a distance was heard the 
gled a sweet pleasure, occasioned by her faint tinkling of a sheep-bell, and soon after 
presence, though they did not now exchange the bleat of flocks ; and the party then knew 
a single word. Annette thought of this won- that they were near some human habitation ; for 
derful escape, of the bustle in which Montoni the light which Ludovico had fancied to proceed 
and his people must be, now that their flight from a town had long been concealed by 
was discovered ; of her native country, whither intervening mountains. Cheered by this hope, 
she hoped she was returning ; and of her they quickened their pace along the narrow 
marriage with Ludovico, to which there no pass they were winding, and it opened upon 
longer appeared any impediment, for poverty one of those pastoral valleys of the Apennines 
she did not consider such. Ludovico, on his which might be painted for a scene of Arcadia, 
part, congratulated himself on having rescued and whose beauty and simplicity are finely 
his Annette and Signora Emily from the dan- contrasted by the grandeur of the snowtopt 
ger that had surrounded them ; on his own mountains above. 

liberation from people whose manners he had The morning light now glimmering in the 
long detested ; on the freedom he had given horizort, showed faintly, at a little distance 
to Monsieur du Pont ; on his prospect of upon the brow of a hill which seemed to peep 
happiness with the object of his affections; from 'under the opening eye-lids of the mom,* 
and not a little on the address with which he the town they were in search of, and which 
had deceived the sentinel, and conducted the they soon after reached. It was not without 
whole of this affair. some difficulty that they there found a house 

Thus, variously engaged in thought, the which could afford shelter for themselves and 
travellers passed on silently for aliove an hour, a their horses; and Emily desired they might 
question being only now and then asked by Du not rest longer than was necessary for refresh- 
Pont concerning the road, or a remark uttered ment. Her appearance excited some surprise ; 
by Annette respecting objects seen imper- for she was without a hat, having had time 
fectly in the twilight. At length lights were only to throw on her veil before she left the 
perceived twinkling on the side of a moun- castle ; a circumstance that compelled her to 
tain, and Ludovico had no doubt that they r^gretagainthewantof money, without which 
proceeded from tiie town he had mentioned ; it was impossible to ^cqcv]s& ^2DQ& ^qisskssrx^ 
while his companions, satisfied by this assur- article oi dces^. 



66 



THE MYSTERIES OP UD0LPH6, 



Ludovico, on examining his purse, found it 
even insufficient to supply present refresh- 
ment ; and Du Pont at length ventured to 
inform the landlord, whose countenance was 
simple and honest, of their exact situation, 
and requested that he would assist them to 



the slopes, with the woods that stretclied 
amphitheatrically along the mountains ! and, 
above all, how elegant the outline of these 
waving Apennines, now softening from the 
wildness which their interior regions exhibi- 
ted ! At a distance, in the east, Emily dis- 



pursue their journey ; a purpose which he pro- covered Florence with its towers rising on the 

mised to comply with, as far as he was able, brilliant horizon, and its luxuriant plain 

when he learned they were prisoners escaping spreading to the feet of the Apennines, 

from Montoni, whom he had too much reason sjjeckled with gardens and magnificent villas, 

to hate. But though he consented to lend them or coloured with groves of orange and lemon, 

fresh horses to carry them to the next town, he with vines, com, and plantations of olives and 

was too poor himself to trust them with money ; mulberry ; while, to the west, the vale opened 

and they were again lamenting their poverty, to the waters of the Mediterranean ; so distant, 

when Ludovico, who had been with his tired that they were known only by a bluish line that 

horses to the hovel which served for a stable, appeared upon the horizon, and by the light 

entered the room half frantic with joy, in marine vapour which just stained the eUier 



which his auditors soon participated. On 
removing the saddle from one of the horses, 
he had found beneath it a small bag, contain- 
ing, no doubt, the booty of one of the 
Cofidottieri, who had returned from a plun- 
dering excursion just before Ludovico left the 
castle, and whose horse, having strayed from 
the mner court while his master was engaged 
in drinking, had brought away the treasure 
which the ruffian had considered the reward 
of his exploit. 

On counting over this, Du Pont found that 



above. 

With a full heart Emily hailed the waves that 
were to bear her back to her native country, 
the remembrance of which, however, brought 
with it a pang ; for she had there no home to 
receive, no parents to w*elcome her, but was 
going, like a forlorn pilgrim, to weep over the 
sad spot where he who was her father lay 
interred. Nor were her spirits cheered when 
she considered how long it would probably be 
before she should see Valancourt, who might 
be stationed with his regiment in a distant 



it would be more than sufficient to carry them part of France, and that, when they did meet, 

all to France, where he now determined to it would be only to lament the successful vil- 

accompany Emily, whether he should obtain lainy of Montoni ; yet, still she would iiave 

intelligence of his regiment or not ; for though felt inexpressible delight at the thought of 

he had as much confidence in the integrity of being once more in the same country with 

Ludovico as his small knowledge of him Valancourt, had it even been certain that she 

allowed, he could not endure the thought of could not see him. 

committing her to his care for the voyage; The intense heat, for it was now noon, 
nor, perhaps, had he resolution enough to obliged the travellers to look out for a shady re- 
deny himself the dangerous pleasure which he cess, where they might rest for a few hours ; and 
might derive from her presence. the neighbouring thickets abounding with wild 

He now consulted them concerning the sea- grapes, raspberries, and figs, promised them 

port to which they should direct their way ; grateful refreshment. Soon after, they turned 

and Ludovico, better informed of the geo- from the road into a grove whose thick foliage 

graphy of the country, said that Leghorn was entirely excluded the sunbeams, and where a 

the nearest port of consequence, which Du spring, gushing from the rock, gave coolness 

Pont knew also to be the most likely of any to the air ; and having alighted and turned 

in Italy to assist their plan, since from thence the horses to graze, Annette and Ludovico ran 

vessels of all nations were continually depart- to gather fruit from the surrounding thickets, of 

ing. Thither, therefore, it was determined that which they soon returned with an abundance, 

they should proceed. The travellers, seated under the shade of a 

Emily having purchased a little straw hat, pine and cypress grove, and on turf enriched 

such as was worn by the peasant girls of with such a profusion of fragrant flowers as 

Tuscany, and some other little necessary Emily had scarcely ever seen, even among the 

equipments for the journey, and the travel- Pyrenees, took their simple repast, and viewed 

lers having exchanged iheir tired horses for with new delight, beneath the dark umbrage 

others better able to carry them, recommenced of gigantic pines, the glowing landscape 

their joyous way as the sun was rising over stretching to the sea. 

the mountains ; and after travelling through Emily and Du Pont gradually became 

the romantic country for several hours, began thoughtful and silent ; but Annette was all 

to descend into the vale of Amo. And here joy and loquacity ; and Ludovico was 



Emily beheld all the charms of sylvan and 

pastoral landscape united, adorned with the 

elegant. vUlsLS of the Florentine nobles, and 

chverssGed mih the various riches oi cw\lw^- 



without forgetting the 

which was due to his 

repast being over, Du 

'E.m\Vj to endeavour to 



gay, 
respectful distance 
companions. The 
Pont recommended 
sleep during these 



tion. How vivid the shrubs that emboweted s^Vr^ \vovvc%» wv^ ^«&\f«v^i\ve servants would 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 6i 

do the same, said he would watch the while ; there are many passages of the same kind 
but Ludovico wished to spare him this trouble ; concealed within the prodigious walls of that 
and Emily and Annette, wearied with travel- edifice, and which were undoubtedly contrived 
ling, tried to repose, while he stood guard for the purpose of facilitating escapes in time 
with his trombone. of war. I'hrough this avenue, at the dead of 

When Emily, refreshed by slumber, awoke, night, I often stole to the terrace, where I 
she found the sentinel asleep on his post, and talked with the utmost caution, lest my steps 
Du Pont awake, but lost in melancholy should betray me to the sentinels on duty in 
thought. As the sun was yet too high to distant parts ; for this end of it, being guarded 
allow them to continue their journey, and as by high buildings, was not watched by soldiers, 
it was necessary that Ludovico, after the toils In one of these midnight wanderings I saw 
and trouble he had suffered, should finish his light in a casement that overlooked the ram- 
sleep, Emily took this opportunity of inquiring part, and which, I observed, was immediately 
by what accident Du Pont became Montoni's over my prison chamber. It occurred to me, 
prisoner ; and he, pleased with the interest that yotl might be in that apartment ; and 
this inquiry expressed, and with the excuse it with the hope of seeing you, I placed myself 
gave him for talking to her of himself, imme- opposite to the window, 
diately answered her curiosity. Emily, remembering the figure that had 

' I came into Italy, madam, said Du Pont, formerly appeared on the terrace, and which 
' in the service of my country. In an adven- had occasioned her so much anxiety, ex- 
ture among the mountains, our party engaging claimed, 'It was you, then, Monsieur du 
with the bands of Montoni, was routed, and Pont, who occasioned me much foolish terror ! 
I, with a few of my comrades, was taken My spiritswere at that time so much weakened 
prisoner. When they told me whose captive by long suffering, that they took alarm at 
I was, the name of Montoni struck me ; for every hint.' Du Pont, after lamenting that 
I remembered that Madame Cheron, your he had occasioned her any apprehension, 
aunt, had married an ItaHan of that name, added : 'As I rested on the wall opposite to 
and that you had accompanied them into your casement, the consideration of your 
Italy. It was not, however, till some time melancholy situation, and of my own, called 
after, that I became convinced that this was from me involuntary sounds of lamentation, ^ 
the same Montoni, or learned that you, which drew you, I fancy, to the casement : I 
madam, was under the same roof with my- saw there a person whom I believed to be 
self. I will not pain you by describing what you. O ! I will say nothing of my emotion 
were my emotions upon this discovery, which at that moment ; I wished to speak, but pru- 
I owned to a sentinel, whom I had so far won dence restrained me, till the distant footstep 
my interest, that he granted me many indul- of the sentinel compelled me suddenly to quit 
gences, one of which was very important to my station. 

me, and somewhat dangerous to himself ; but ' It was some time before I had another 
he persisted in refusing to convey any letter, opportunity of walking, for I could only leave 
or notice of my situation, to you ; for he my pison when it happened to be the turn of 
justly dreaded a discovery, and the consequent one man to guard me ; meanwhile I became 
vengeance of Montoni. He however enabled convinced, from some circumstances related 
me to see you more than once. You are sur- by him, that your apartment was over mine ; 
prised, madam : and I will explain myself, and when again I ventured forth, I returned 19 
My health and spirits suffered extremely from your casement, where again I saw you, but 
want of air and exercise ; and at length I without daring to speak. I waved my hand, 
gained so far upon the pity, or the avarice of and you suddenly disappeared ; then it was 
the man, that he gave me the means of walk- that I forgot my prudence, and yielded to 
ing on the terrace. lamentation ; again you appeared — you spoke 

Emily now Ustened with very anxious attcn- — I heard the well-known accent of your 
tion to the narrative of Du Pont, who pro- voice ! and at that moment my discretion 
ceeded : would have forsaken me again, had I not 

' In granting this indulgence, he knew that heard also the approaching steps of a soldier, 
he had nothing to apprehend from a chance when I instantly quitted the place, though 
of my escaping from a castle which was vigi- not before the man had seen me. He fol- 
lantly guarded, and the nearest terrace of lowed down the terrace, and gained so fast 
which rose over a perpendicular rock : he upon me that I was compelled to make use of 
showed me also,' continued Du Pont, 'a door a stratagem, ridiculous enough, to save my- 
concealed in the cedar wainscot of the apart- self. I had heard of the superstition of many 
ment where I was confined, which he instructed of these men, and I uttered a strange noise, 
me how to open ; and which, leading into a with a hope that my pursuer would rnistake it 
passage formed within the thickness of the for something supernatural, and desist from 
wall that extended far along the castle, finally pursuit. Luckily for myself, I succeeded ; 
opened in an obscure comer of the eastern the man, it seems, was subject t.<i ^iis»^ -icss^ 
rampart. I have since been informed that the t«toi\\^?^\fteK^^ >Cca^^\assL'xBX^^«^^^^^ 



64 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



The storm of midnight swells, the sails are furl'd. 
Deep sounds the lead, but finds no friendly shore ; 
Fast o'er the waves the wretched baric is huri'd, 
' O Ellen, Ellen ! we must meet no more !' 

Lightnings, that show the vast and foamy deep, 
The rending thunders, as they onward roll. 
The loud, loud winds, that o'er the billows sweep — 
Shake the firm nerve, appal the bravest soul ! 

Ah I what avails the seamen's toiling care 1— 
The strainihg cordage bursts, the mast is riven ; 
The sounds of terror groan along the air, 
T^en sink afar; the baric on rocks is driven ! 

Fierce o'er the wreck the whelming; watere pass'd. 
The helpless crew sunk in the roanng main I 
Henry's faint accents trembled in the blast — ^ 
' Farewell, my love ! — we ne'er shall meet again X 

Oft, at the calm and silent evening hour. 
When summer-breezes linger on the wave, 
A melancholy voice b heard to pour 
Its lonely sweetness o'er poor Henry's grave ; — 

And oft, at midnight, airy strains are heard 
Around the |^ove where Ellen's form is laid ; 
Nor is the du^e by village maidens fear'd. 
For lovers' spirits guard the holy shade ! 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

• Oh 1 the joy 

Of yoimg ideas painted on the mind 
In the warm glowing colours fancy spreads 
On objects not yet known, when ^ is new. 
And all is lovely I' 

Sacrbd Dramas. 

We now return to Languedoc, and to the 
mention of Count de Villefort, the nobleman 
who succeeded to an estate of the Marquis de 
Villeroi situated near the monastery of St. 
Claire. It may be recollected, that this cha- 
teau was uninhabited when St. Aubert and his 
daughter were in the neighbourhood, and that 
the former was much affected on discovering 
himself to be so near Chateau-le- Blanc, a place 
concerning which the good old La Voisin 
afterwards dropped some hints that had alarmed 
Emily's curiosity. 

It was in the year 1584, the beginning of 
that in which St. Aubert died, that Francis 
Beauveau, Count de Villefort, came into pos- 
session of the mansions and extensive domain 
called Chateau-le- Blanc, situated in the pro- 
vince of Languedoc, on the^ shore of the 
Mediterranean. This estate, ' which during 
some centuries had belonged to his family, 
now descended to him on the decease of his 
relative the Marquis de Villeroi, who had been 
latterly a man of reserved manners and austere 
character; circumstances which, together with 
the duties of his profession, that often called 
him into the field, had prevented any degree 
of intimacy with his cousin, the Count de 
Villefort. For many years they had known 
little of each other, and the count received the 
first intelligence of his death, which happened 
in A distant part of France, togelVieT v<\iVv xVie 
instruments that gave him possession ol \}ciQ 



domain of Chateau-le-Blanc ; but it was not till 
the following year that he detennined to visit 
that estate, when he designed to piass the autumn 
there. The scenes of Chateau-le-Blaiic often 
Came to his remembrance, heightened by the 
touches whidi a warm imagination gives to the 
recollection of early pleasures ; for many years 
before, in the lifetime oi the Marchioness, and 
at that age when the mind is particolarty 
sensible to impressions of gaiety smd d^ight. 
he had once visited this spot ; and though he 
had passed a long intervening period amidst 
the vexations and tumults of puUic affairs, 
which too frequently corrode the heart and viti- 
ate the taste, the shades of Languedoc and the 
grandeur of its distant scenery had never been 
remembered by him with indifference. 

During many years the chateau had been 
abandoned by the late Marquis, and, bdng 
inhabited only by an old steward and Ids wife, 
had been suffered to fall much into decay. To 
superintend the repairs that would be requisite 
to make it a comfortable residence, had been 
a principal motive with the count for passing 
the autumnal months in Languedoc; and 
neither the remonstrances nor the tears of the 
countess, for on tu'gent occasions she cooM 
weep, were powerful enough to overcome his 
determination. She prepared therefore, to obey 
the command which she could not conqoer, 
and to resign the gay assemblies of Fuis^ 
where her beauty was generally unrivalled, and 
won the applause to which her wit had bat 
feeble claim — for the twilight canopy of woods, 
the lonely grandeur of mountains, and the 
solemnity of gothic haUs. and of long, long 
galleries which echoed only the soUtarystep 
of a domestic, or the measured clink that 
ascended from the great clock — ^the ancient 
monitor of the hall below. From these melan- 
choly expectations she endeavoured to relicw 
her spirits by recollecting all that she had 
ever heard concerning the joyous vintage <rf 
the plains of Languedoc ! but there, alas ! no 
airy forms would bound to the gay melody of 
Parisian dances, and a view of the rustic 
festivities of peasants could afford little pleasme 
to a heart, in which even the fedings of 
ordinary benevolence had long since decayed 
under the corruptions of luxiuy. 

The count had a son and a daughter, the 
children of a former marriage, who he de- 
signed should accompany him to the south 
of France ; Henri, who was in his twentieth 
year, was in the French service ; and Biancbe. 
who was not yet eighteen, had been hitherto 
confined to the convent, where she had been 
placed immediately on her father's second mar- 
riage. The present countess, who had neither 
sufficient ai^ility nor inclination to sup>erintend 
the education of her daughter-in-law, had ad- 
vised this step ; arid the dread of superior 
beauty had since urged her to employ every 
axithat might prevail on the count to prolong 
\\i<& ^9^0^ Ql'&asL^^'^^ecLusion ; it was tbeie- 



THE MVSTkRinS OP UDOLPHO. 6^ 

fore with extreme mortification that she now tender regret had thrown upon her spirits, 
understood he would no longer submit on this Inattentive to a conversation which was pas- 
subject ; yet it afforded her some consolation to sing between the countess and a Mademoiselle 
consider that, though the Lady Blanche would Beam, her friend Blanche sat, lost in pleasing 
emerge from the convent, the shades of the reverie, as she watched the clouds floating 
country would for some time veil her beauty silently along the blue expanse, now veiling 
from the public eye. the sun and stretching their shadows along 

On the morning which commenced the the distant scene, and then disclosing all his 

journey, the postilions stopped at the con- brightness. The joiuney continued to give 

vent, by the count's order, to take up Blanche, Blanche inexpressible delight, for new scenes 

whose heart beat with delight at the prospect of nature were every instant opening to her 

of novelty and freedom now before her. As view, and her fancy became stored with gay 

the time of her departure drew nigh, her im- and beautiful imagery. 

patience had increased ; and the last night. It was on the evening of the seventh day 
during which she counted every note of every that the travellers came within view of the 
hour, had appeared the most tedious of any Cliateau-le-Blanc, the romantic beauty of 
she had ever known. The morning light at whose situation strongly impressed the Ima- 
length dawned ; the matin-bell rang ; she gination of Blanche, who observed with sub- 
heard the nuns descending from their cham- lime astonishment the Pyrenean mountains, 
bers, and she started from a sleepless pillow, which had been seen only at a distance during 
to welcome the day which was to emancipate her the day, now rising within a few leag\tes, with 
from the severities of a cloister, and introduce her their wild cliffs and immense precipices, which 
. to a world where pleasure was ever smiling, and the evening clouds, floating round them, now 
goodness ever blessed — ^where, in short, no- disclosed, and again veiled. The setting rays, 
thing but pleasure and goodness reigned! that tinged their snowy summits with a roseate 
When the bell of the great gate rang, and the hue, touched their lower points with various 
sound was followed by that of carriage-wheels, colouring, while the bluish tints that per- 
she ran, with a palpitating heart, to her lattice, vaded their shadowy recesses gave the strength 
and perceiving her father's carriage, in the of contrast to the splendour of light. The 
court below, danced, with airy steps, along the plains of Languedoc, blushing with the purple 
gallery, where she was met by a nun with a vine, and diversified with groves of mulberry, 
summons from the abbess. In the next mo- almond, and olives, spread far to the north 
ment she was in the parlour, and in the pre- and east : to the south appeared the Mediter- 
sence of the countess, who now appeared to ranean, clear as crystal, and blue as the 
her as an angel that was to lead her into hap- heavens it reflected, bearing on its bosom 
piness. But the emotions of the countess, on vessels, whose white sails caught the sun- 
. beholding her, were not in unison with those beam, and gave animation to the scene. On 
' of Blanche, who had never appeared so lovely a high promontory, washed by the waters of 
as at this moment, when her countenance, the Mediterranean, stood her father's man- 
animated by the lightening smile of joy, sion, almost secluded from the eye by woods 
glowed with the beauty of happy innocence. of intermingled pine, oak, and chestnut, 
\ After conversing for a few minutes with the which crowned the eminence, and sloped 
abbess, the countess rose to go. This was towards the plains on one side ; while on the 
the moment which Blanche had anticipated with other they extended to a considerable dis- 
such eager expectation, the summit from which tance along the sea-shores, 
she looked down upon the fairy land of hap- As Blanche drew nearer, the Gothic features 
piness, and surveyed all its enchantment ; — of this ancient mansion successively appeared 
was it a moment, then, for tears of regret ? — first an embattled turret rising above the 
Yet it was so. She turned with an altered and trees — then the broken arch of an immense 
dejected countenance to her young com- gate-way retiring beyond them ; and she 
panions, who were come to bid her farewell, almost fancied herself approaching a castle, 
and wept ! Even my lady abbess, so stately such as is often celebrated in early story, 
and so solemn, she saluted with a degree of where the knights look out from the battle- 
sorrow which an hour before she would have ments on some champion below, who, clothed 
beheved it impossible to feel, and which may in black armour, comes, with his companions, 
be accounted for by considering how reluc- to rescue the fair lady of his love from the 
tantly we all part, even with unpleasing objects, oppression of his rival ; a sort of legends to 
when the separation is consciously for ever, which she had once or twice obtained access 
Again she kissed the. poor nuns, and then in the library of her convent, that, like many 
followed the countess from that spot with others belonging to the monks, was stored 
tears, which she expected to leave only with with these relics of romantic fiction, 
smiles. ^ The carriages stopped at a gate which led 

But the presence of her' father, and the into the domain of the chateau, but which 

variety of objects on the road, soon engaged was now fastened ; and the great bell, that 

her attention, and dissipated the shade which had formerly served to asMxoiwaJi^ Niofc ^axwv-^ 



66 THJS MVSTJSRIBS OF VDOLPM. 

of strangfers, having long since fallen from its the old steward and the Parisian servants wild 

station, a servant climbed over a ruined part had been sent to prepare the chateau, waiting 

of the adjoining wall, to give notice to those to receive their lord. Lady Blanche now per- 

within of the arrival of their lord. ceived that the edifice was not built entirely in 

As Blanche leaned from the coach window, the Grothic style, but that it had additions of 
she resigned herself to the sweet and gentle a more modem date ; the lai^e and gloomy 
emotions which the hour and the scenery hall, however, into which she now entered, 
awakened. The sun had now left the earth, was entirely Gothic r and sumptuous tapestry, 
and twilight began to darken the mountains ; which it was now too dark to distinguish, 
while the distant waters, reflecting the blush hung upon the walls, and depictured scenes 
that still glowed in the west, appeared like a from some of the ancient Proven9al romances, 
line of light skirting the horizon. The low A vast Gothic window, embroidered with 
murmur of waves breaking on the shore came clematis and eglantine, that ascended to the 
in the breeze, and now and then the melancholy south, led the eye, now that the casements 
dashing of oars was feebly heard from a dis- were thrown open, through this verdant 
tance. She was suffered to indulge her pen- shade, over a sloping lawn to the tops of dark 
sive mood, for the thoughts of the rest of the woods that hung upon the brow of the pro- 
party wore silently engaged upon the subjects montory. Beyond appeared the waters of the 
of their several interests. Meanwhile the Mediterranean, stretcning far to the south 
countess, reflecting with regret upon the gay and to the east, where they were lost in the 
parties she had left at Paris, surveyed with horizon ; while to the north-east they were 
disgust what she thought the gloomy woods bounded by the luxuriant shores of Languedoc 
and solitanr wildness of the scene ; and shrink- and Provence, enriched with wood, and gay 
ing from the prospect of being shut up in an with vines and sloping pasture ; and to the 
old castle, was prepared to meet every object south-west, by the majestic P)rrenees, now 
with displeasure. The feelings of Henri were fading from the eye beneath the gradual gloouL 
somewhat similar to those of Uie countess ; Blanche, as she crossed the hall, stopped a 
he gave a mournful sigh to the delights of the moment to observe this lovely prospect, which 
capital, and to the remembrance of a lady, the evening twilight obscured, yet did not 
who, he believed, had engaged his aflections, conceal. But she was quickly awakened &om 
and who had certainly fascinated his ima- complacent delight, which this scene had 
gination ; but the surrounding country, and diflused upon her mind, by the countess, who, 
the mode of life on which he was entering, discontented with every object around, and 
had for him at least the chanii of novelty, and impatient for refreshment andrepose» hastened 
kis regret was softened by the gay expectations forward to a large parlour, whose cedar 
of youth. wainscot, narrow pointed casements, and 

The gates being at length unbarred, the dark ceiling of carved cypress wood, gave it 

carriage moved slowly on unde.- spreading an aspect of peculiar gloom, which die dingy 

chestnuts that almost excluded the remains of green velvet of the chairs and couches, fringed 

day, following what had been formerly a with tarnished gold, had once been designed 

road, but which now, overgrown with luxuriant to enliven. 

vegetation, could be traced only by the boun- While the countess inquired for refresh- 
dajry formed by trees on either side, and which ment, the count, attended by his son, went to 
wound' for near half a mile among the woods look over some part of the chateau ; and 
before it reached the chateaiL This was the Lady Blanche reluctantly remained to witness 
very avenue that St. Aubert and Emily had the discontent and ill humour of her step- 
formerly entered, on their first arrival in the mother. 

neighbourhood, with the hope of finding a ' How long have you lived in this desolate 

house that would receive them for the night, place ?' said her ladyship to the old house- 

and had so abruptly quitted on perceiving the keeper, who came to pay her duty. ' Above 

wildness of the place, and a figure whicli the twenty years your ladyship, on the next feast 

postilion had fancied was a robber. of St. Jerome.' 

' What a dismal place is this !' exclaimed ' How happened it that you have lived here 

the countess as the carriage penetrated the solong, and almost alone, too? I understood 

deeper recesses of the woods. Surely, my that the chateau had been shut up for some 

lord, you do not mean to pass all the autumn years ?' 

in this barbarous spot ! One ought to bring ' Yes, madam, it was for many years after 

hither a cup of the waters of Lethe, that the my late lord, the count, went to the wars ; 

remembrance of pleasanter scenes may not but it is above twenty years since I and my 

heighten at least the natural dreariness of these. ' husband came into his service. The i^ce is 

' I shall be governed by circumstances, so large, and has of late been so lonely, that 

madam,' said the count ; ' this barbarous spot we were lost in it, and after some time we 

wa^ inhabited by my ancestors.' went to live in a cottage at the end of the 

The carriage now stopped at the chateau, woods, near some of the tenants, and came to 

yvhere at the door of the great baU appeacred look after the chateau every now and then. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 67 

When my lord returned to France from the clouds of evening, and a landscape whose 

wars, he took a dislike to the place, and never features, thinly veiled in twilight, no longei- 

came to live here again, and so he was satisfied appeared distinctly, but, blended into one 

with our remaining at the cottage. Alas — grand mass, stretched to the horizon, coloured 

^as ! how the chateau is changed from what only with a tint of solemn gray, 

it once was! What delight my late lady The gallery terminated in a saloon, to which 

used to take in it ! I well remember when the window she had seen through an open 

she came here a bride, and how fine it was. door belonged ; but the increasing dusk per- 

Now it has been neglected so long, and is mitted her only an imperfect view of this 

gone into such decay ! I shall never see those apartment, which seemed to be magnificent, 

days again. and of modem architecture ; though it had 

The countess appearing to be somewhat been either suffered to fall into decay or had 

offended by the thoughtless simplicity with never been properly finished. The windows, 

which the old woman regretted former times, which were numerous and large, descendal 

Doroth^e added — ' But the chateau will now low, and afforded a very extensive, and, what 

be inhabited, and cheerful again ; not all the Blanche's fancy represented to be, a very 

world could tempt me to live in it alone. ' lovely prospect ; and she stood for some time 

' Well, the experiment will not be made, I surveying the gray obscurity, and depictiuing 

believe,' siid the countess, displeased that her imaginary woods and mountains, valleys and 

own silence had been unable to awe the rivers, on this scene of night ; her solemn 

loquacity of this rustic old housekeeper, now sensations rather assisted, than interrupted, 

spared from further attendance by the entrance by the distant bark of a watch-dog, and by 

of the count, who said he had been viewing the breeze as it trembled upon the light foliage 

part of the chateau, and found that it would of the shrubs. Now and then appeared for a 

require considerable repairs and some alte- moment, among the woods, a cottage light ; 

rations before it would be perfectly comfortable and at length was heard afar off the evening 

as a place of residence. * I am sorry to hear bell of a convent, dying on the air. When 

it, my lord,' replied the coujitess.' 'And she withdrew her thoughts from these subjects 

why sorry, madam f ' Because the place of fanciful delight, the gloom and silence of 

will iU repay your trouble ; and were it even the saloon somewhat awed her ; and having 

in paradise, it would be insufferable at such a sought the door of the gallery, and pursued 

distance from Paris. ' for a considerable time a dark passage, she 

TTie count made no reply, but walked came to a hall, but one totally different from 

abruptly to a window. 'There are? windows, that she had formerly seen. By the twilight 

my lord, but they neither admit entertainment admitted through an open portico she could 

nor light ; they show only a scene of savage just distinguish this apartment to be of very 

nature.' light and airy architecture, and that it was 

•I am at a loss, madam,' said the count, paved with white marble, pillars of which sup- 

* to conjecture what you mean by savage ported the roof that rose into arches built in 
nature. Do those plams, or those woods, or the Moorish style. While Blanche stood on 
that fine expanse of water deserve the name?' the steps of this portico, the moon rose over 

"Those mountains certainly do, my lord,' the sea, and gradually disclosed in partial 

rejoined the countess, pointing to the Pyre- light the beauties of the eminence on which 

nees ; ' and this chateau, though not a work she stood, whence a lawn, now rude and over- 

of rude nature, is, to my taste at least, one of grown with high grass, sloped to the woods, 

savage art.' The count coloured highly, that, almost surrounding the chateau, extended 

* This place, madam, was the work of my in a grand sweep down the southern sides of 
ancestors,' said he ; ' and you must allow me the promontory to the very margin of the 
to say, that your present conversation dis- ocean. Beyond the woods on the north side 
covers neither good taste nor good manners. ' appeared a long tract of the plains of Lan- 
Blanche, now shocked at an altercation which guedoc ; and to the east, the landscape she 
appeared to be increasing to a serious dis- had before dimly seen, with the towers of a 
agreement, rose to leave the room, when her monastery illumined by the moon, rising over 
mother's woman entered it, and the countess, dark groves. 

immediately desiring to be shown to her own The soft and shadowy tints that overspread 

apartment, withdrew, attended by Made- the scene, the waves undulating in the moon- 

moiselle Beam. light, and their low and measured murmurs 

Lady Blanche, it being not yet dark, took on the beach were circumstances that united 

this opportunity of exploring new scenes ; and to elevate the unaccustomed mind of Blanche 

leaving the parlour, she passed from the hall to enthusiasm. 

into a wide gallery, whose walls were deco- ' And have I lived in this glorious world so 

rated by marble pilasters, which supported an long,' said she, ' and never till now beheld 

arched roof composed of a rich mosaic work, such a prospect — never experienced these 

Through a distant window, that seemed to delights ! Every peasant girl on my father's 

terminate the gallery, were seen the purple domain has viewed from her lnfasLC'^^fca.^'6Kpi 



68 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



of nature, has ranged at liberty her romantic 
wilds ; while I have been shut in a cloister 
from the view of these beautiful appearances, 
which were designed to enchant all eyes and 
awaken all hearts. How can the poor nuns 
and friars feel the full fervour of devotion if 
they never see the sun rise or set ! Never till 
this evening did I know what true devotion 
is ; for never before did I see the sun sink 
below the vast earth ! To-morrow, for the 
first time in my life, I will see it rise. O who 
would live in Paris, to look upon black walls 
and dirty streets, when, in the country, they 
might gaze on the blue heavens and all the 
green earth !' 

This enthusiastic soliloquy was interrupted 
by a rustling noise in the hall : and while the 
loneliness of the place made her sensible to fear, 
she thought she perceived something moving 
between the pillars. For a moment she con- 
tinued silently observing it, till, ashamed of 
her ridiculous apprehensions, she collected 
courage enough to demand who was there. 
• O my young lady, is it you ?' said the old 
housekeeper, who was come to shut the win- 
dows. The manner in which she spoke this, 
with a faint breath, rather surprised Blanche, 
who said, ' You seemtd frightened, Dorothy, 
what is the matter ?' 

' No, not frightened, ma'amselle,' replied 
Doroth^e, hesitating, and trying to appear 
composed ; ' but I am old, and — a little matter 
startles me.' The lady Blanche smiled at the 
distinction. ' I am glad that my lord the count 
is come to live at the chateau, ma'amselle,' 
continued Doroth^e; 'for it has been many 
a year deserted, and dreary enough ; now the 
place will look a little as it used to do when 
my poor lady was alive. Blanche inquired 
how long it was since the marchioness died ?' 
' Alas, my lady 1' replied Doroth^e, ' so long 
— that I have ceased to count the years ! The 
place, to my mind, has mourned ever since ; 
and I am sure my lord's vassals have. But 
you have lost yourself, ma'amselle — shall I 
show you to the other side of the cha- 
teau?' 

Blanche inquired how long this part of 
the edifice had been built. 'Soon after my 
lord's marriage, ma'am,' replied Doroth^e. 
' The place was large enough without this 
addition, for many rooms of the old building 
were even then never made use of, and my 
lord had a princely household too ; but he 
thought the ancient mansion gloomy, and 
gloomy enough it is !' Lady Blanche now de- 
sired to be shown to the inhabited part of the 
chateau ; and as the passages were entirely 
dark, Doroth^e conducted her along the edge 
of the lawn to the opposite side of the edifice 
where, a door opening into the great hall, she 
was met by Mademoiselle Beam. ' Where 
have you been so long?' said she; 'I had 
begun to think some wonderful adven- 
ture had befallen you, and thaX \\ie gia^l gi 



this enchanted castle, or the ghost which no 
doubt haunts it, had conveyed you through a 
trap-door into some subterranean vault, whence 
you was never to return.' 

'No,' replied Blanche laughingly, 'you 
seem to love adventures so weU, that I leave 
them for you to achieve.' 

' Well, I am willing to achieve them, provided 
I am allowed to describe them.' 

' My dear Mademoiselle Beam/ said Henri, 
as he met her at the door of the parlour, ' no 
ghost of these days would be so savage as to 
impose silence on you. Our ghosts are more 
civilised than to condemn a lady to a purga- 
tory severer even than their own, be it what it 
may.' 

Mademoiselle Beam replied only by a 
laugh ; and the count now entering the room, 
supper was served, during which he spoke 
little, frequently appeared to be abstracted 
from the company, and more than once re- 
marked that the place was greatly altered since 
he had last seen it. Many vears have inter- 
vened since that period,' said he ; ' and though 
the grand features of the scenery admit of no 
change, they impress me with sensations very 
different from those I formerly experience.' 

' Did these scenes, sir/ said Blanche, 'ever 
appear more lovely than they do now ? To 
me this seems hardly possible.' The count, 
regarding her with a melancholy smile, said, 
' "They once were as delightful to me as Uiey 
are now to you ; the landscape is not changed, 
but time has changed me ; from my mind the 
illusion which gave spirit to the colouring of 
nature, is fading fast ! If you live, my dear 
Blanche, to revisit this spot at the distance of 
many years, you will perhaps remember and 
understand the feelings of your father/ 

Lady Blanche, affected by these words, re- 
mained silent ; she looked forward to the 
period which the count anticipxated ; and con- 
sidering ihat he who now spoke would then 
probably be no more, her eyes, bent to the 
ground, were filled with tears. She gave her 
hand to her father, who, smiling affectionately, 
rose from his chair, and went to a window to 
conceal his emotion. 

The fatigues of the day made the party 
separate at an early hour ; when Blanche re- 
tired through a long oak gallery to her cham- 
ber, whose spacious and lofty walls, high an- 
tiquated casements, and, what was the effect 
of these, its gloomy air, did not reconcile her 
to its remote situation in this ancient building. 
The furniture also was of ancient date ; the 
bed was of blue damask trimmed with tar- 
nished gold lace, and its lofty tester rose in 
the form of a canopy, whence the curtains 
descended, like those of such tents as are 
sometimes represented in old pictures, and, 
indeed, much resembling those exhibited on 
the faded tapestry with which the chamber was 
hua^. To Blanche, every object here was matter 
qI ^iwtvQiXvN \ •occA^\aj!v\\N.^ the Ught from her 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



<9 



woman to examine the tapestry, she perceived 
that it represented scenes from the walls of 
Troy, though the almost colourless worsted 
now mocked the glowing actions they once 
had painted. She laughed at the ludicrous 
absurdity she observed, till recollecting that 
the hands which had woven it were, like the 
poet whose thoughts of fire they had attempted 
to express, long since mouldered into dust, a 
train of melancholy ideas passed over her 
mind, and she almost wept. 

Having given her woman a strict injunction 
to awaken her before sun-rise, she dismissed 
her ; and then, to dissipate the gloom which re- 
flection had cast upon her spirits, opened one of 
the high casements, and was again cheered 
by the face of living nature. The shadowy 
earth, the air, the ocean — ^all was still. Along 
the deep serene of the heavens a few light 
clouds floated slowly, through whose skirts the 
stars now seemed to tremble, and now to 
emerge with purer splendour. Blanche's 
thoughts arose involuntarily to the Great 
Author of the sublime objects she contem- 
plated, and she breathed a prayer of finer de- 
votion than any she had ever uttered beneath 
the vaulted roof of a cloister. At this case- 
ment she remained till the glooms of midnight 
were stretched over the prospect. She then 
retired to her pillow, and, ' with gay visions of 
to-morrow,' to those sweet slumbers which 
health and happy innocence only know. 

' To-morrow, to fresh woods and pastures new.' 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

* What transport to retrace our early plays, ^ 
Our easy bliss, when each thing joy supplied, 
The woods, the mountains, and the warbling maze 
Of the wild brooks I' 

Thomson. 

Blanche's slumbers continued till long after 
the hour which she had so impatiently antici- 
pated ; for her woman, fatigued with travelling, 
did not call her till breakfast was nearly ready. 
Her disappointment, however, was instantly 
forgotten, when on opening the casement she 
saw on the one hand, the wide sea sparkling in 
the morning rays, with its stealing sails and 
glancing oars ; and on the other, the fresh 
woods, the plains far-stretchfng, and the blue 
mountains, all glowing with the splendour of 
the day. 

As she inspired the pure breeze, health 
spread a deeper blush upon her countenance, 
and pleasure danced in her eyes. 

'Who could first invent convents?* said she, 
' and who could first persuade people to go 
into them ? and to make religion a pretence, 
too, where all that should inspire it is so care- 
fully shut out? God is best pleased with the 
homage of a grateftd heart ; and when we 
view his glories, we feel most grateful I 



never felt so much devotion, during the many 
dull years I was in the convent, as I have 
done in the few hours that I have been here, 
where I need only look on all around me — to 
adore God in my inmost heart I 

Saying this she left the window, botmded 
along the gallery, and in the next moment was 
in the breakfast-room, where the count was 
already seated. The cheerfulness of a bright 
sunshine had dispersed the melancholy glooms 
of his reflections, a pleasant smile was on his 
countenance, and he spoke in an enlivening 
voice to Blanche, vdiose heart echoed baoc 
the tones. Henri, and soon after the countess 
with Mademoiselle Beam appeared, and the 
whole party seemed to acknowledge the in- 
fluence of the scene ; even the countess was so 
much re-animated as to receive the civilities cX. 
her husband with complacencv, and but once 
forgot her good-humour, which was when she 
asked wheUier they had any neighbours who 
were likely to make this barbarous spot more 
tolerable, and whether the count believed it 
possible for her to exist here without some 
amusement. 

Soon after breakfast the party dispersed. 
The count, ordering his steward to attend him 
in the Ubrary, went to survey the condition of 
his premises, and to visit some of his tenants ; 
Henri hastened with alacrity to the shore to 
examine a boat that was to bear them on a 
little voyage in the evening, and to superintend 
the adjustment of a silk awning ; while the 
countess, attended by Mademoiselle Beam, 
retired to an apartment on the modem side of 
the chateau, which was fitted up with airy 
elegance: and as the windows opened upon 
balconies that fronted the sea, she was there 
saved from a view of the horrid Pyrenees. 
Here, while she reclined on a sofa, and, cast- 
ing her languid eyes over the ocean, which 
appeared beyond the wood-tops, indtdged in 
the luxuries of ennui, her companion read 
aloud a sentimental novel on some fashionable 
system of philosophy, for the countess was 
herself somewhat of a philosopher , especially 
as to infidelity ; and among a certain circle 
her opinions were waited for with impatience, 
and received as doctrines. 

The Lady Blanche, meanwhile, hastened to 
indulge, amidst the wild wood-walks aroimd 
the chateau, her new enthusiasm, where, as 
she wandered under the shades, h^ gay spirits 
gradually yielded to pensive complacency. 
Now she moved with solemn steps beneath 
the gloom of thickly interwoven branches, where 
the fresh dew still hung upon eveiy flower that 
peeped from among the grass ; and now 
tripped sportively sdong the path on which 
the sun-beams darted and the checquered foli- 
age trembled — where the tender greens of the 
beech, the acacia, and the mountain-ash, min- 
ging with the sol«nn tints of the cedar, the 
pine, and cypress, exhibited as fine a contrast 
of colouring as tha Taa.\^^^S& ^jr*^ "^s^ ^x^Kai3ii. 



TO 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 



planedidof form, to the feathery lightness of the 
cork-tree, and the waving grace of the poplar. 
Having reached a rustic seat within a deep 
recess of the woods, she rested a-while ; and 
as her eyes caught through a distant opening 
ft glimpse of the blue waters of the Mediterra- 
nean, with a white sail gliding on its bosom, 
or of the broad mountain glowing beneath 
the mid-day sun, her mind experienced some- 
what of that exquisite delight which awakens 
the fancy and leads to poetry. The hiun of 
bees alone broke the stillness around her, as, 
with other insects of various hues, they sported 
gaily in the shade, or sipped sweets from the 
fresh flowers : and while Blanche watched a 
butterfly flitting from bud to bud, she indulged 
herself in imagining the pleasures of its 
diort day, till she had composed the follow- 
ing stanzas : 

THE BUTTERFLY TO HIS LOVE. 

What bowery dell, with fra^ant breath. 
Courts thee^ to stay thy airy flight ; 

Nor seek again the purple heath, 
So oft the scene of gay delight? 

Lone I've watch'd i' the lily's bellj 
Whose whiteness stole the morning's beam. 

No fluttering sounds thy coming tell. 
No waving wings at distance gleam. 

But fountain fresh, nor breathing grove. 
Nor sunny mead, nor blossom'd tree. 

So sweet as lily's cell shall prove, — 
The bower of constant love and me. 

When April buds begin to blow. 
The primrose, and the harebell blue. 

That on the verdant moss-bank grow. 
With violet cups that weep in dew ; 

When wanton gales breathe through the shade. 
And shake the blooms, and steaftheir sweets. 
And swell the song of every glade, 
I range the forest's green retreats : 

There, through the tangled wood-walks play. 

Where no rude urchin paces near. 
Where sparely peeps the sultry day. 

And light dews freshen all the air. 

High on a sun-beam oft I sport, 
O'er bower and fountain, vale and hill. 

Oft every blushing floweret court. 
That hangs its head o'er winding rill. 

But these I'll leave to be thy guide, 
And show thee where the jasmine spreads - 

Her snowy leaf, where May-flowers hide. 
And rose-buds rear their peeping heads. 

With me the mountain's summit scale, 

A nd taste the wild-thyme's honey'd bloom. 

Whose fragrance, floating on the gale. 
Oft leads me to the cedar's gloom. 

Yet, yet, no sound comes in the breeze I 
What shade thus dares to tempt thy stay ? 

Once, me alone thou wish'd to please. 
And with me only thou would'st stray. 

But, while thy long delay I mourn. 
And chide the sweet shades for their guile, 

Thou mayst be true, and they forlorn, 
And fairy favours court thy smile. 

The tiny queen of fairy-land. 

Who knows thy speed, hath sent thee far, 
To bring, or ere the night-watch stand, 
Rich eMence for her shadowy car • 



Perchance her acom-cups to fill 

With nectar from the Indian ro&e. 
Or gather, near some Haunted rill, 

May-dews, that lull to sleep Love's wocs/ 

Or o'er the mountains bade thee fly. 

To tell her fairy love to speed, 
When evening steals upon the sky. 

To dance along the twilight meaid. 

But now I see thee sailing low. 
Gay as the brightest flowers of spring. 

Thy coat of blue and jet I know. 
And well thy gold and purple wing. 

Borne on the gale, thou com'st to me ; 

O I welcome, welcome to my home I 
In lily's cell we'll live in glee, 

Together o'er the mountains roam 1 

When Lady Blanche returned to the cha- 
teau, instead of going to the apartment of 
the countess, she amused herself with wan- 
dering over that part of the edifice which she 
had not yet examined, of which the most 
ancient first attracted her curiosity : for though 
what she had seen of the modem was gay 
and el^ant, there was something in the 
former more interesting to her imagination. 
Having passed up the great staircase and 
through the oak gallery, she entered upon a 
long suite of chambers, whose walls were 
either hung with tapestry or wainscoted with 
cedar, the furniture of which looked almost as 
ancient as the rooms themselves ; the spacious 
fire-places, where no mark of social cheer re- 
mained, presented an image of cold desola- 
tion ; and the whole suite had so much the air 
of neglect and desertion, that it seemed as if 
the venerable persons whose portraits hung 
upon the walls had been the last to inhabit them. 

On leaving these rooms, she found herself 
in another gallery, one end of which was ter- 
minated by a back staircase, and the other by 
a door that seemed to communicate with the 
north side of the chateau, but which, being fas- 
tened, she descended the staircase, and, open- 
ing a door in the wall a few steps down, found 
herself in a small square room that formed 
part of the west turret of the castle. Three 
windows presented each a separate and beauti- 
ful prospect : that to the north overlooking 
Languedoc ; another to the west, the hills as- 
cending towards the Pyrenees, whose awful 
summits crowned the landscape ; and a third, 
fronting the south', gave the Mediterranean, 
and a part of the wild shores of RoussiUon, 
to the eye. 

Having left the turret and descended the 
narrow staircase, she found herself in a dusky 

Eassage, where she wandered, unable to find 
er way, till impatience yielded to apprehen- 
sion, and she called for assistance. Presently 
steps approached and light glimmered through 
a door at the other extremity of the passage, 
>yhich was opened with caution by some per- 
son who did not venture beyond it, and whom 
Blanche observed in silence, till the door was 
closing, when she called aloud, and, hasten- 
vcv^\.QYJ«i.ids\t, ^rceiredthe old housekeeper. 



THB MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 9t 

' Dear ma'amselle : is it you f said Doroth^e. had ordered coffee and other refreshments to 
• How coiild you find your way hither ?* Had be carried ; and thither the sailors now steered 
Blanche been less occupied by her own fears, their course, following the windings of the 
she would probably have observed the strong shore round many a woody promontory and 
expressions of terror and surprise onDorothde's circling bay ; whUe the pensive tones of horns 
countenance, who now led her through a long and other wind instruments, played by the at- 
succession of passages and rooms, that looked tendants in a distant boat, echoed among the 
as if they had been uninhabited for a century, rocks, and died along the waves. Blanche 
till they reached that appropriated to the had now subdued her fears ; a delightful 
housekeeper, where Doroth^e entreated she tranquillity stole over her mind, and held her 
would sit down and take refreshment. Blanche in silence ; and she was too happy to remcm- 
accepted the sweetmeats offered to her, men- ber even the convent, or her former sorrows, 
tioned her discovery of the pleasant turret, as subjects of comparison With her present 
and her wish to appropriate it to her own use. felicity. 

Whether Doroth6e's taste was not so sensible The countess felt less unhappy than she had 
to the beauties of landscape as her young done since the moment of her leaving Paris ; 
lady's, or that the constant view of lovely for her mind was now tmder some degree of 
scenery had deadened it, she forbore to praise restraint. She feared to indulge its wayward 
the subject of Blanche's enthusiasm, which, humours, and even wished to recover the 
however, her silence did not repress. To count's good opinion. On his family, and on 
I^dy Blanche's inquiry of whither the door the surrounding scene, he looked with tem- 
she had found fastened led, she replied, that pered pleasure and benevolent satisfaction, 
it opened to a suite of rooms which had not while his son exhibited the gay spirits of 
been entered during many years ; 'for,' added youth, anticipating new delights, and regret- 
she, ' my late lady died in one of them, and less of those that were passed. 
I could never find in my heart to go into After near an hour's rowing, the party 
them since.' landed, and ascended a little path overgrown 

Blanche, though she wished to see those with vegetation. At a little distance ft'om the 
chambers, forbore, on observing that Doro- point of the eminence, within the shadowy re- 
th^'s eyes were filled with tears, to ask her cess of the woods, appeared the pavilion, 
to unlock them, and soon after went to dress which Blanche perceived, as she caught a 
for dinner, at which the whole party met in glimpse of its portico between the trees, to be 
good spirits and good humour, except the built of variegated marble. As she folloived 
countess, whose vacant mind, overcome by the the countess, she often turned her eyes ' 
langour of idleness, would neither suffer her with rapture towards the ocean, seen beneath 
to he happy herself, or to contribute to the hap- the dark foliage far below, and from thence 
plness of others. Mademoiselle Beam, at- upon the deep woods, whose silence and im- 
tempting to be witty, directed her dadi- penetrable gloom awakened emotions more 
nage against Henri ; who answered because solemn, but scarcely less delightful, 
he could not well avoid it, rather than from The pavilion had been prepared, as far as 
any inclination to notice her, whose liveliness was possible on a very short notice, for the 
sometimes amused, but whose conceit and reception of its visitors ; but the faded colours 
insensibility often disgusted him. of its painted walls and ceiling, and the de- 

The cheerfulness with which Blanche re- cayed drapery of its once magnificent fumi- 
joined the party vanished on her reaching the ture, declared how long it had been neglected 
margin of the sea ; she gazed with apprehen- and abandoned to tl^ empire of the chang- 
sion upon the vast expanse of waters which, at ing seasons. While the party partook of a 
a distance, she had beheld only with dehght collation of fruit and coffee, the horns, placed 
and astonishment ; and it was by a strong in a distant part of the woods where an echo 
effort that she so far overcame her fears as to sweetened and prolonged their melancholy 
follow her father into the boat. tones, broke softly on the stillness of the 

As she silently surveyed the vast horizon scene. This spot seemed to attract even the 
bending round the distant verge of the ocean, admiration of the coimtess ; or perhaps it was 
an emotion of sublimest rapture struggled to merely the pleasure of planning furniture and 
overcome a sense of personal danger. A light decorations, that made her dwell so long on 
breeze played on the water and on the silk the necessity of repairing and adorning it ; 
awning of the boat, and waved the foliage erf while the count, never happier than when he 
the receding woods that crowned the clifft saw her mind engaged by natural and simple 
for many miles, and which the count surveyed Objects, ac<^uiesced in all her designs concfem- 
with the pride of conscious property, as ing the pavilion. The paintings on the walls 
well as with the eye of tastfC. and coved ceiling were to be renewed ; the 

At some distance among these woods stood canppfos and sofas were to be light green 
a pavilion, which had once been the scene of damasks ; marble statues of wood-nymphs 
social gaiety, and which its situation still made bearing on their heads baskets of living 
one of romantic beauty. Thither tiie count flowers were to adorn the rftcesfifc^\ifcN:«ws^'^E». 



72 THE MVSTERIBS OP VDOLPHO. 

windows, which, descending to the ground. All without was silent and forsaken : but 

were to admit to every part of the room (and it while Blanche gazed with admiration on this 

was of octagonal form) the various landscape, venerable pile, whose effect was heightened by 

One window opened upon a romantic glade, the strong lights and shadows thrown athwart 

where the eye roved among woody recesses, it by a cloudy sunset, a sound of many voices, 

and the scene was bounded only byaleng- slowly chanting, arose from within. The 

thened pomp of groves ; from another the count bade his men rest on their oars. The 

woods receding disclosed the distant summits monks were singing the hymn of vespers, and 

of the Pyrenees ; a third fronted an avenue, some female voices mingled with the strain ; 

beyond which the gray towers of Chateau-le- which rose, by soft degrees, till the high 

Blanc and the picturesque part of its ruin organ and the choial sounds swelled into full 

were seen partially among the foliage ; while and solemn harmony. The strain soon after 

a fourth gave, between the trees, a glimpse of dropped into sudden silence, and was renewed 

the green pastures and villages that diversify in a low and still more solemn key ; till at 

the banks of the Aude. The Mediterranean, length the holy chorus died away, and was 

with the bold cliffs that overlooked its shores, heard no more. — Blanche sighed ; tears 

were the grand objects of a fifth window ; and trembled in her eyes ; and her thoughts 

the others gave, m different points of view, seemed wafted with the sounds to heaven, 

the wild scenery of the woods. While a rapt stillness prevailed in the boat, a 

After wandering for some time in these, the train of friars, and then of nuns veiled in 

party returned to the shore, and embarked ; white, issued from the cloisters, and passed 

and, the beauty of the evening tempting them under the shade of the woods to the main 

to extend their excursion, they proceeded fur- body of the edifice. 

ther up the bay. A dead calm had succeeded The countess was the first of her party to 

the light breeze that wafted them hither, and awaken from this pause of silence, 

the men took to their oars. Around, the ' These dismal hymns and friars make one 

waters were spread into one vast expanse of quite melancholy, 'said she; 'twilight is coming 

poHshed mirror, reflecting the gray cliff- and on : pray let us return, or it will be dark 

feathery woods that overhung its surface, ihe before we get home.' 

glowofthewestem horizon, and the dark clouds The count, looking up, now perceived that 
that came slowly from the east. Blanche loved the twilght of evening was anticipated by an 
to see the dipping oars imprint the water, and approaching storm. In the east a tempest 
to watch the spreading circles they left, which was collecting : a heavy gloom came on, op- 
gave a tremulous motion to the reflected land- posing and contrasting the glowing splendour 
scape, without destroying the harmony of its of the setting sun : the c&morous sea-fowl 
features. skimmed in fleet circles upon the surface of 

Above the darkness oi the woods, her eye the sea, dipping their Ught pinions in the 

now caught a cluster of high towers touched wave, as they fled away in search of shelter, 

withthesplendourof the set ting rays; and soon The boatmen pulled hard at their oars. But 

after, the horns being then silent, she heard the thimder that now muttered at a distance, 

the faint swell of choral voices from a distance, and the heavy drops that began to dimple the 

* What voices are those upon the air ?' said water, made the count determine to put back 
the coimt, looking round and listening ; — but to the monastery for shelter ; and the course 
the strain had ceased. ' It seemed to be a of the boat was immediately changed. As 
vesper hymn which I have often heard in my the clouds approached the west, their lurid 
convent,' said Blanche. darkness changed to a deep ruddy glow, 

• We are near the monastery, then,' ob- which, by reflection, seemed to fire the tops 
served the count ; and the boat soon after of the woods and the shattered towers of the 
doubling a lofty headland, the monastery of monastery. 

St. Claire appeared, seated near the margin The appearance of the heavens alarmed the 
of the sea ; where the cliffs suddenly sinking countess and Mademoiselle B«am ; whose ex- 
formed a low shore within a small bay almost pressions of apprehension distressed the count, 
encircled with woods, among which partial and perplexed his men ; while Blanche con- 
features of the edifice were seen—the great tinned silent— now agitated with fear, and 
gate and Gothic window of the hall, the now with admiration, as she viewed the 
cloisters, and the side of a chapel more re- grandeur of the clouds, and their effect on the 
mote ; while a venerable arch, which had scenery, and listened to the long, long peals of 
once led to a part of the fabric now de- thunder that rolled through the air. 
.molished, stood a maje^ic ruin, detached The boat having reached the lawn before 
from the main building, beyond which ap- the monastery, the count sent a servant to an- 
gled a grand perspective of the woods, noimce his arrival, and to entreat shelter of 
On the grey walls the moss had fastened, and the superior ; who soon after appeared at the 
round the pointed ^^indows of the chapel the great gate attended by several monks ; while 
ivy and the briony hung in many a ianxasvk \J\e sfctvaat returned with a message expres- 
wnaUk %\\^ ax QiURfc lA >aa^'^\\aiiN.^ ^jid pride-— but of 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



73 



pride disgfuised in submission. The party 
immediately disembarked ; and having hastily 
crossed the lawn — for the shower was now 
heavy — were received at the gate by the 
superior ; who, as they entered, stretched 
forth his hand and gave his blessing ; and 
they passed into the great hall, where the 
lady-abbess waited, attended by several nuns 
clothed, like herself, in black, and veiled in 
white. The veil of the abbess was, however, 
thrown half back, and discovered a counten- 
ance whose chaste dignity was sweetened by 
the smile of welcome with which she addressed 
the countess ; whom she led with Blanche 
and Mademoiselle Beam into the convent 
parlour, while the count and Henri were con- 
ducted by the superior to the refectory. 

The countess, fatigued and discontented, 
received the politeness of the abbess with care- 
less haughtiness, and had followed her with 
indolent steps to the parlour ; over which the 
painted casements, and wainscot of larch 
wood, threw at all times a melancholy shade, 
and where the gloom of evening now loured 
almost to darkness. 

While the lady abbess ordered refreshment, 
and conversed with the countess, Blanche 
withdrew to a window ; the lower panes of 
which being without painting, allowed her to 
observe the progress of the storm over the 
Mediterranean ; whose dark waves, that had 
so lately slept, now came boldly swelling in 
long succession to the shore, where they burst 
in white foam, and threw up a high spray over 
the rocks. A red sulphureous tint overspread 
the long line of clouds that hung above the 
western horizon ; beneath whose dark skirts 
the sun looking out illumined the distant 
shores of Languedoc, as well as the tufted 
summits of the nearer woods, and shed a 
partial gleam on the western waves. The 
rest of the scene was in deep gloom, except 
where a sunbeam, darting between the clouds, 
glanced on the white wings of the sea-fowl 
that circled high among them, or touched the 
swelling sail of a vessel which was seen 
labouring in the storm. Blanche for some 
time anxiously watched the progress of the 
bark as it threw the waves in foam arounc^ it ; 
and, as the lightnings flashed, looked to the 
opening heavens with many a sigh for the fate 
of the poor mariners. 

The sun at length set, and the heavy clouds 
which had long impended, dropped over the 
splendour df his course ; the vessel, however, 
was yet dimly seen ; and Blanche continued 
to observe it, till the quick succession of flashes, 
lighting up the gloom of the whole horizon, 
warned her to retire from the window, and 
she joined the abbess ; who, having exhausted 
all her topics of conversation with the coun- 
tess, had now leisure to notice her. 

But their discourse was interrupted by tre- 
mendous peals of thunder ; and the bell of 
the monastery soou after ringiDjg^ out, sum>' 



moned the inhabitants to prayer. As Blanche 
passed the windows she gave another look to 
the ocean ; where, by the momentary flash 
that illumined the vast bodv of the waters, 
she distinguished the vessel she had observed 
before, -amidst a sea of foam, breaking the 
billows — the mast now bowing to the waves 
and then rising high in air. 

She sighed fervently as she gazed, and then 
followed the lady abbess and the countess to 
the chapel. Meanwhile some of the count's 
servants, having gone by land to the chateau 
for carriages, returned soon after vespers had 
concluded ; when, the storm being somewhat 
abated, the count and his family returned 
home. Blanche was surprised to discover 
how much the windings of the shore had 
deceived her concerning the distance of the 
chateau from the monastery ; whose vesper- 
bell she had heard on the preceding evening 
from the windows of the west saloon, and 
whose towers she would also have seen from 
thence, had not twilight veiled them. 

On their arrival at the chateau, the countess, 
affecting more fatigue than she really felt, 
withdrew to her apartment, and the count, 
with his daughter and Henri, went to the 
supper-room ; where they had not been long 
when they heard, in a pause of the gust, a 
firing of guns ; which the count understand- 
ing to be signals of distress from some vessel 
in the storm, went to a window that opened 
towards the Mediterranean, to observe further ; 
but the sea Was now involved in utter dark- 
ness, and the loud bowlings of the tempest 
had again overcome every other sound. 
Blanche, remembering the bark which she 
had before seen, now joined her father with 
trembling anxiety. In a few moments the 
report of guns was again borne along the 
wind, and as suddenly wafted away ; a tre- 
mendous burst of thunder followed ; and in 
the flash that had preceded it, and which 
seemed to quiver over the whole surface of 
the waters, a vessel was discovered, tossing 
amidst the white foam of the waves, at some 
distance from the shore. Impenetrable dark- 
ness again involved the scene ; but soon a 
second flash showed the bark, with one sail 
unfurled, driving towards the coa.st. Blanche 
hung upon her father's arm with looks full of 
the agony of united terror and pity ; which 
were unnecessary to awaken the heart of the 
count, who gazed upon the sea with a piteous 
expression, and, perceiving that no boat could 
Uve in the storm, forbore to send one ; but he 
gave orders to his people tojcarry torches out 
upon the cliff"— hoping they might prove a 
kind of beacon to the vessel, or at least warn 
the crew of the rocks they were approaching. 
While Henri went out to direct on what part 
of the cliffis the lights should appear, Blanche 
remained with her father at the window, 
catching every now and then, as the lightnltL^s. 
flashed, a gjlim^^ Qt \Jq!^ ^^^'^ \ '«a.^^RiSi 'a^ifsi^ 



74 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLFHO. 



saw with reviving hope the torches flaming Annette, nieanwhile, in the servants* hall 
on the blackness of night, and, as they waved was telling of all the dangers she had en- 
over the cliffs, casting a red gleam on the countered, and congratuUting herself so 
gasping billows. When the firing of guns heartily upon her own and Ludovico's escape, 
was repeated, the torches were tos^d high in and on her pres^it comforts, that she often 
the air, as if answering the signal, and the made all that part of the chateau ring with 



firing was then redoubled ; but though the 
wind bore the sound away, she fancied, as 
the lightnings glanced, that the vessel was 
much nearer the shore. 

The count's servants were now seen running 
to and fro on the rocks : some venturing 
almost to the points of the crags, and bend- 
ing over, held out their torches fastened to 
long poles : while others, whose steps could 
be traced only by the course of the lights, a sleepless one^ 
descended the steep and dangerous path that native country, 
woimd to the margin of the sea, and with 
loud lialloos hailed the mariners ; whose shrill 
wMsUe, and then feeble voices, where heard 
at intervals mingling with the storm. Sudden 
shouts from the people on the rocks increased 
the anxiety of Blanche to an almost intoler- 
able degree ; but her suspense concerning 
the fate of the mariners was soon over, when 



merriment and laughter. Ludovico's spirits 
were as gay as her own ; but he had discre- 
tion enough to restrain them, and tried to 
check hers, though in vain ; till her laughter 
at length ascended to my lady's chamber; 
who sent to inquire what occasioned so much 
uproar in the chateau, and to conunand silence. 
Emily withdrew early to seek the repose 
she so much required ; but her pillow was long 

On this her return to her 
many interesting remem- 
brances were awakened ; all the events and 
sufferings she had experienced since she 
quitted it, came in long succession to her 
fancy, and were chased only by the image of 
Valancoiu-t ; with whom to bdieve herself 
once more in the same land, sifter they had 
been so long and so distantly separated, gave 
her emotions of indescribable joy ; but which 



Henri, nmning breathless into the room, told afterwards yielded to anxiety and apprehen- 
that the vessel was anchored in the bay below, sion, when she consid^ed the long period 
but in so shattered a condition, that it was that had elapsed since any letter had passed 



feared she would part before the crew could 
disembark. The count immediately gave 
orders for Ills own boats to assist in bringing 
them to shore, and that such of these unfor- 
tunate strangers as could not be accom- 
modated in the adjacent hamlet, should be 



between them, and how much might have 
happened in this interval to affect her future 
peace. But the thought that Valancourt 
might be now no more, or, if living, might 
have forgotten her, was so very tern& to her 
heart, that she would scarcely suffer herself 



entertained at the chateau. Among the latter to pause upon the possibility. She determined 
were Emily St. Aubert, Monsieur du Pont, to inform him on the following day of her 
Ludovico, and Annette ; who, having em- arrival in France ; which it was scarcely pos- 
barked at Leghorn, and reached Marseilles, sible he could. know but by a letter from her- 
wcre from thence crossing the Gulf of Lyons self : and after soothing her spirits with the 
when this storm overtook them. They were hope of soon hearing that he was well and 
received by the count with his usual benignity ; unchanged in his affections, she at length 
who, though Emily wished to hav;e proceeded sunk to repose, 
immediately to the monastery of St. Claire, 

would not allow her to leave the chateau that — — 

night ; and, indeed, the terror and fatigue 
she had suffered would scarcely have per- 
mitted her to go farther. 

In Monsieur du Pont the count discovered 
an old acquaintance, and much joy and con- 
gratulation passed between them ; after which 
Emily was introduced by name to the count's 
family, whose hospitable benevolence dissi- 
pated the little embarrassment which her 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

* Oft woo'd the gleam of Cynthia, silver bright, 
In cloisters dim, far from the haunts of Folly, 
With Freedom by my side, and soft-eyed Melaa- 
clioly.' 

Gray. 

The Lady Blanche was so much interested 



situation had occasioned her ; and the party for Emily, that upon hearing she was going 
were soon seated at the supper- table. The to reside in the neighbouring convent, she re- 
unaffected kindness of Blanche, and the lively quested the count would invite her to lengthen 
joy she expressed on the escape of the stran- her stay at the chateau. ' And jou know, my 
gers, for whom her pity had been so much dear sir,' added Blanche, 'how delighted I 



interested, gradually revived Emily's languid 
spirits ; and Du Pont, relieved from his 
terrors for her and for himself, felt the full 
contrast between his late situation on a dark 
and iremcndows ocean, and his present one in 



shall be with such a companion ; for at pre- 
sent I have no friend to walk or to read with, 
since Mademoiselle Beam is my mamma's 
friend only.' 
The count smiled at the youthful simphcity 



a cheerful mansion, where he was surroundeOL \n\\\v nnVvvcXi Vvvs daughter jielded to first im 
with plenty, defiance, au<L SQules of Yje^cOTCie. i^i^^^\Q\i'i\ ^sl^^wjl^ x^a ^^^^ vi vr-^un her 



THE MYSTERIES OE VDOLPMO. W 

of their danger, he silently applauded the interested by Dorothde the housekeeper, who 

benevolence that could thus readily expand attended them ; whose appearance was almost 

in confidence to a stranger. He had observed as antique as the objects around her, and 

Emily with attention on the preceding even- who seemed no less interested by Emily ; on 

ing, and was as much pleased with her as it whom she frequently gazed with so much deep 

was possible he could be with any person on attention, as scarcely to hear what was said 

so short an acquaintance ; the mention made to her. 

of her by Mons. du Pont had also given him While Emily looked from one t)f the case- 
a favourable impression of Emily ; but, ex- ments, she perceived, with siuprise, some 
tremely cautious as to those whom he Intro- objects that were familiar to her memory— 
duced to the intimacy of his daughter, he the fields and woods with the gleammg 
determined, on hearing that the former was brook, which she had passed with La Voisin, 
no stranger at the convent of St. Claire, to one evening, soon after the death of Mons. 
visit the abbess ; and, if her account corre- St. Aubert, in her way from the monastery to 
sponded with his wish, to invite Emily to pass the cottage ; and she now knew this to be the 
some time at the chateau. On this subject he chateau which he had then avoided, and 
was influenced by a consideration of the Lady concerning which he had dropped some re- 
Blanche's welfare, still more than by either a markable hints. 

wish to oblige her, or to befriend the orphan Shocked by this discovery, yet scarcely 

Emily, in whom, however, he felt consider- knowing why, she mused for some time in 

ably interested. silence, and remembered the emotion which 

On the following morning Emily was too her father had betrayed on finding himself so 

much fatigued to appear ; but Mons. du Pont near this mansion, and some other circum- 

was at the breakfast-table when the count stances of his conduct, that noW greatly 

entered the room ; who pressed him, as his interested her. The music, too, which she 

former acquaintance, and the son of a very had formerly heard, and respecting which La 

old friend, to prolong his stay at the chateau Voisin had given such an odd account, oc- 

— an invitation which Du Pont willingly curred to her ; and desirous of knowing more 

accepted, since it would allow him to be near concerning it, she asked Dorothde whether it 

Emily ; and though he was not conscious of returned at midnight, as usual, and whether 

encouraging a hope that she would ever the musician had yet been discovered, 

return his affection, he had not fortitude 'Yes, ma'amselle,' replied Dorothy ; 'that 

enough to attempt, at present, to overcome it. music is still heard ; but the musician has 

Emily, when she was somewhat recovered, never been found out, nor ever will, I believe ; 

wandered with her new friend over the grounds though there are some people who can guess.* 

belonging to the chateau, as much delighted ' Indeed ! ' said Emily : ' then why do they 

with the surrounding views, as Blanche, in not pursue the inquiry ?' 

the benevolence of her heart, had wished ; from ' Ah, young lady ! inquiry enough has been 

thence she perceived, beyond the woods, the made — but who can pursue a spirit?' 

towers of the monastery, and remarked that Emily smiled, and remembering how lately 

it was to this convent she designed to go. she had suffered herself to be led away by 

'Ah r said Blanche with surprise, ' I am but superstition, determined now to resist its con- 
just released from a convent, and would you go tagion ; yet, in spite of her efforts, she felt 
into one ? If you could know what pleasure I awe mingled witli her curiosity on this subject ; 
feel in wandering here at liberty, and in seeing and Blanche, who had hitherto listened in 
the sky, and the fields, and the woods all silence, now inquired what this music was, 
around me, I think you would not.' Emily, and how long it had been heard, 
smiling at the warmth with which the Lady 'Ever since the death of my Lady, madam,' 
Blanche spoke, observed, ' that she did not replied Doroth^e. 
mean to confine herself to a convent for life. ' ' Why, the place is not haunted, surely ?' 

'No, you may not intend it now,' said said Blanche, between jesting and seriousness, 

Blanche ; ' but you do not know to what the ' I have heard that music almost ever since 

nuns may persuade you to consent : I know my dear lady died,' continued Doroth^e, 'and 

how kind they will appear, and how happy, never before then. But that is nothing to 

for I have seen too much of their art.' some things I could tell of.' 

When they returned to the chateau. Lady ' Do, pray, tell them then,' said Lady 

Blanche conducted Emily to her favourite Blanche, now more in earnest than in jest : 

turret : and from thence they rambled through • I am much interested \, for I have heard sister 

the ancient chambers, which Blanche had Henriette and sister Sophie, in the convent, 

visited before. Emily was amused by ob- tell of such stran|[e appearances which they 

serving the structure of these apartments, and themselves had witnessed.* 

the fashion of their old, but still magnificent ' You never heard, my lady, I suppose, 

furniture, and by comparing them with those what made us leave the chateau, and go and 

of the castle of Udolpho, which were yet live in a ("ottage ?' said Doroth^e* ' K^:^^stV 

more antique and grotesque. She. was also replied Blaacbft ^>3ciVs&:^r^<sc^^:^ 



jS THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 

* NorthewasOn that my lord the Marquis ' should like to look into the glass you spoke of 

Dorotb^ checked herself, hesitated, and just now, and see a few of the circumstances 

then endeavoured to change the topic ; but the which you say often pass over it ' 

curiosity of Blanche was too much awakened ' No, my lady,' replied Dorothee : • if you 

to suffer the subject thus easily to escape her, knew as much as I do, you would not ; for 

and she pressed the old housekeeper to pro- you would find there a dismal train of them. 

ceed with her account : upon whom, however, I often wish I could shut them out, but they 

no entreaties could prevail ; and it was evi- will rise to my mind. I see my dear lady on 

dent that she was alarmed for the imprudence her death-bed — her very look — and remember 

into which she had already betrayed herself. all she said : — it was a terrible scene !' 

• I perceive,' said Emily smiUng, ' that all * Why was it so terrible?' said Emily with 

old mansions are haunted ; I am lately come emotion. 

from a place of wonders ; but unluckily, since ' Ah, dear young lady ! is not death always 

I left it, I have beard almost aU of them ex- terrible ?' replied Dorothte. 

plained, ' To some further inquiries of Blanche. Doro- 

Blanche was silent ; Dorothee looked grave, th^ was silent ; and Emily, observing the 

and sighed ; and Emily felt herself still in- tears in her eyes, forbore to urge the subject, 

clined to believe more of the wx)nderful than and endeavoured to withdraw the attention of 

she chose to acknowledge. Just then she re- her young friend to some object in the gardens ; 

membered the spectacle she had witnessed in where the count with the countess and Mon- 

a chamber of Udolpho, and, by an odd kind sleur du Pont appearing, they went down to 

of coincidence, the alarming words that had join them. 

met her in the MS. papers which she had When he perceived Emily, he advanced to 

destroyed in obedience to the command of meet her. and presented her to the countess in 

her father ; and she shuddered at the meaning a manner so benign, that it recalled most 

they seemed to impart, almost as much as at powerfully to her mind the idea of her late 

the horrible appearance disclosed by the black father ; and she felt more gratitude to him 

veil. than embarrassment towards the countess: 

The Lady Blanche, meanwhile, unable to who, however, received her with one of those 

prevail with Doroth^ to explain the subject fascinating smiles which her caprice some- 

of her late hints, had desired, on reaching the times allowed her to assume, and which was 

door that terminated the gallery, and which now the result of a conversation the count had 

she found fastened on the preceding day, to held with her concerning Emily. Whatever 

see the suite of rooms beyond. ' Dear young this might be, or whatever had passed in his 

lady,' said the housekeeper, * I have told you conversation with the lady abbess, whom he 

my reason for not opening them : I have had just visited, esteem and kindness were 

never seen them since my dear lady died ; and strongly apparent in his manner when he 

it would go hard with me to see them now. addressed Emily ; who experienced that sweet 

Pray, madam, do not ask me again.' emotion which arises from the consciousness 

'Certainly I will not,' replied Blanche, 'if of possessing the approbation of the good; 

that is really your objection.' for to the count's worth she had been incUned 

'Alas! it is,' said the old woman ; 'we to yield her confidence almost from the first 
all loved her well, and I shall always grieve moment in which she had seen him. 
for her. Time runs round ! — it is now many Before she could finish her acknowledgments 
years since she died ; but I remember every- for the hospitality she had received, and men- 
thing that happened then, as if it was but lion her design of going immediately to the 
yesterday. Many things that have passed of convent, she was interrupted by an invitation 
late years are gone quite from my memory ; to lengthen her stay at the chateau ; which was 
while those so long ago I can see as if in a pressed by the count and the countess, with 
glass. ' She paused ; but after\vards, as they an appearance of such friendly sincerity that 
walked up the gallery, added of Emily, ' This though she much wished to see her old friends 
young lady sometimes brings the late mar- at the monastery, and to sigh once more over 
chioness to my mind : I can remember when her father's grave, she consented to remain 
she looked just as blooming, and very like her a few days at the^chateau. 
when she smiles. Poor lady! how gay she To the abbess, however, she immediately 
was when she first came to the chateau !' wrote mentioning her arrival in Languedoc, 

' And was she not gay afterwards ?' said and her wish to be received into the convent 

Blanche. as a boarder : she also sent letters to Mon- 

• Dorothfee shook her head ; and Emily sieur Quesnel, and to Valancourt, whom she 

observed her with eyes strongly expressive of merely informed of her arrival in France ; and, 

the interest she now felt. ' Let us sit down in as she knew not where the latter might be sta- 

this window,' said the Ladv Blanche, on reach- tioned, she directed her letter to his brother's 

ing the opposite end of the gallery : • and seat in Gascony. 

pny, DorotMe, if it is not painful to you, tell In the evening I^dy Blanche and Monsieur 
iiM some thing more about the xnarctuon^ss ; 1 ^u l?oii\. vialked with Emily to the cottage of 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 77 

1^ Voisin ; which she had now a melancholy pursued her since she quitted it, and for the 

pleasure in approaching ; for time had softened good which she yet possessed, and though 

her grief for the loss of St. Aubert, though she once more wept over her father's grave 

it could not annihilate it, and she felt a sooSi- with tears of tender affection, her grief was 

ing sadness in indulging the recollections which softened from its former acuteness. 

this scene recalled. La Voisin was still living, Some time after her return to the monastery, 

and seemed to enjoy as much as formerly the she received a letter from her uncle Monsieur 

tranquil evening of a blameless life. He was Quesnel, in answer to information that she 

sitting at the door of his cottage, watching had arrived in France, and to her inquiries 

some of his grandchildren playing on the concerning such of her affairs as he had under- 

grass before him, and now and then, with a taken to conduct during her absence, espe- 

laugh or a commendation, encouraging their daily as to the period for which La Valine had 

sports. He immediately recollected Emily, been let : whither it was her wish to return, 

whom he was much pleased to see ; and she if it should appear that her income would 

was as rejoiced to hear that he had not lost permit her to do so. The reply of Monsieur 

one of his family since her departure. Quesnel was cold and formal as she expected, 

' Yes, ma'amselle,' said the old man, 'we all expressing neither concern for the evils she 

live merrily together still, thank God ! and I had suffered, nor pleasure that she was now 

believe there is not a happier family to be found removed from them; nor did he allow the 

in Languedoc than ours. ' opportunity to pass of reproving her for her 

Emily did not trust herself in the chamber rejection of Count Morano, whom he affected 

where St. Aubert died ; and after half an hour's still to believe a man of honour and fortune ; 

conversation with La Voisin and his family, nor of vehemently declaiming against Mon- 

she left the cottage. toni, to whom he had always, till now, felt 

During these the first days of her stay at himself to be inferior. On Emily's pecuniary. 
Chateau-le-Blanc, she was often affected by concerns he was not very explicit : he informed 
observing the deep but silent melancholy which her, however, that the term for which La 
at times stole over Du Pont ; and Emily, Valine had been engaged was nearly expired ; 
pitying the self-delusion which disarmed him but, without inviting her to his own house, 
of the will to depart', determined to withdraw added, that her circumstances would by no 
herself as soon as the respect she owed the means allow her to reside there, and earnestly 
Count and Countess De Villefort would per- advised her to remain for the present in the 
mit. The dejection of his friend soon alarmed convent of St. Claire. To her inquiries re- 
the anxiety of the count ; to whom Du Pont specting poor old Theresa, her late father's 
at length confided the secret of his hopeless servant, he gave no answer. In the post- 
affection ; which, however, the former could script to his letter, Monsieur Quesnel men- 
only commiserate, though he secretly deter- tioned M. Motteville, in whose hands the late 
mined to befriend his suit, if an opportunity of St. Aubert had placed the chief of his per- 
doing so should ever occur. Considering the sonal property, as being likely to arrange his 
dangerous situation of Du Pont, he but feebly affairs nearly to the satisfaction of his creditors, 
opposed his intention of leaving Chateau-le- and that Emily would recover much more of 
Blanc on the following day, but drew from her fortunfe than she had formerly reason to 
him a promise of a longer visit when he could expect. The letter also inclosed to Emily 
return with safety to his peace. Emily herself, an order upon a merchant at Narbonne for 
though she could not encourage his affection, a small sum of money. 

esteemed him, both for the many virtues he The tranquillity of the monastery, and the 
possessed and for the services she had received liberty she was suffered to enjoy in wandering 
from him ; and it was not without tender among the woods and shores of this delight- 
emotions of gratitude and pity, that she now ful province, gradually restored her spirits to 
saw him depart for his family seat in Gas- their natural tone ; except that anxiety would 
cony ; while he took leave of her with a sometimes intrude concerning Valancourt, as 
countenance so expressive of love and grief, the time approached when it was possible that 
as to interest the count more warmly in his she might receive an answer to her letter, 
cause than before. 

In a few days Emily also left the chateau ; 

but not before the count and countess had CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

received her promise to repeat her visit very , . , , ^ \ -' » 

soon ; andshewaswelcomedby the abbess with a* ^ n*7^^t.' ''*^' *^^®"* * cloud impends, 

a,e same maternal kindness sL had formerly i^^^^[ fhTdJckTScr fthe '^I^STA. 

experienced, and by the nuns with much Howl o'er the masts, and sing through every shroud; 

expression of regard. The well-known scenes Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears; 

of the convent occasioned her many melan- And instant death on every wave appears.' 

choly recollections ; but with these were Pope's Homer. 

mingled others, that inspired gratitude for The Lady Blanche, meanwhile, who was left 

having escaped the vaiious dangers that had much alone, becaraa vav$^Jo>ssjX Vst Sioa. ^y^rcssr 



7« 



tHE MYSTERIES OP UD0LPH6. 



panv of her new firiend, whom she wished to 
obeerre sharing in the delight she received 
from the beAntifnl scenery around. She had 
now no person to whom she could express her 
admiration and communicate her pleasures ; 
no eye that sparkled to her smile, or counte- 
nance that reflected her happiness ; and she 
became spiritlos and pensive. The count, 
observing her dissatisfaction, readily ]rielded 
to her entreaties, and reminded Elmily of her 
promised visiL But the silence of Valancourt 
which was now prolonged far be>-ond the 
period when a letter might have arrived from 
Estuvi^re, opfxressed Emily writh se>^ere anxiety, 
and, nend^riog her averse to society, she would 
willingly have deferred her acceptance of tliis 
invitation till her s(Mrits should be relieved. 
The count and his family, hovk-ever. pressed 
to see her; and as the drcnmstances that 
prompted her wish for solitude could not be 
explained, there was an appearance of caprice 
in her refusal, which she could not persevo^ 
in \rithout emending the friends whose esteem 
she valued. At length, therefore, she re- 
turned upon a second visit to Chateau-ic- Blanc. 
Here the friendly manner of Count de Ville- 
fort encouraged Emily to mention to him her 
situation respecting the estates of her late 
aimt, and to consult him on the means of re- 
covering them. He had little doubt that the 
law would decide in ho* favour ; and, advising 
her to apply to it. ofifered, first, to write to-an 
advocate at AvigncHi, on whose opinion he 
thought he could rely. His kindness was 
gratefully accepted by Emily ; who, soothed 
by the courtesy she daily experienced, would 
have been once more happy, could she have 
been assured of Valancourt's welfare and un- 
altered affection. She had now been above a 
week at the chateau without receiving intelli- 
gence of him ; and though she knew that, if 
he was absent from his brother's residence, it 
was scarcely probable her letter had jret 
reached him, she could not forbear to admit 
doubts and fears that destroyed her peace. 
Again she would consider of all tliat ml^ht 
have happened in the long period since her 
first seclusion at Udolpho ; and her mind was 
sometimes so overwhelmed with an appre- 
hension that Valancourt was no more, or that 
he lived no longer for her, that the company 
even of Blanche became intolerably oppressive ; 
and she would sit alone in her apartment for 
hours together, when the engagements of the 
family allowed her to do so without incivility. 
In one of these solitary hours, she unlocked 
a little box which contained some letters of 
Valancourt, with some drawings she had 
sketched during her stay in Tuscany ; the 
latter of which were no longer interesting to 
her ; but in the letters she now with melan- 
choly indulgence meant to retrace the tender- 
ness that had so often soothed her, and 
rendered her, for a moment, insensible of the 
distance which separated her from the v^iix^i. 



But their effect was now changed : the alfec^ 
tion they eroressM appealed so forcibly to 
her heart, when she considered that it had, 
porhaps. jri^ded to the powers of time and 
absence, and even the view of the hand-writing 
recalled so many painful recollections, that 
she found herself unaUe to go through the 
first die had opoied ; and sat musing, with 
her chedc resting on ho* arm, and tears steal- 
ing from her eyes, when old Dorothy entered 
the room, to inform her that diimer would be 
ready an hour bdbre the usual time. E^nily 
started on perceiving her, and hastily put up 
the papers ; but not before Dorothde had ob- 
ser\'ed both her agitation and her tears. 

'Ah, ma'amselle !' said she, 'you, who are 
so young, — have you reason for sorrow ?'• 

Emily tried to smile, but was unable to 
speak. 

' .-Mas, dear young lady I when ycm come to 
my age, you will not weep at trifles ; — and 
surely you have nothing serious to grieve you?* 

' No. Dorothde ; nothing oi any conse- 
quence, ' replied Emily. Doroth^, now stoop- 
ing to pick up something that had dropp»i 
from among the papers, suddenly exdaimed, 
— ' Holy Mary ! what is it I see?' and then, 
trembling, sat down in a chair that stood by 
the table. 

' What is it you do see? ' said Emily, alarmed 
by her manner, and looking roimd the room. 

' It is herself ! ' said Dorothy ; *her \&j 
sdf 1 just as she looked a litde before ^e 
died!' 

Emily, still more alarmed, began now to 
fear that Dorothy was seized with sudden 
phrensy ; but entreated her to explain herself. 

* That picture I ' said she ; ' where did you 
find it, lady ? — it is my blessed mistress ho*- 
self!" 

She laid on the table the miniature which 
Emily had so long ago found among the p>apers 
her father had enjoined her to destroy, and 
over which she had once seen him shed such 
tender and affecting tears ; and recollecting 
all the various circumstances of his conduct, 
that had long perplexed her, her emotions 
increased to an excess which deprived her of 
all power to ask the questions she trembled to 
have answered ; and she could only inquire, 
whether Dorothde was certain the picture re- 
sembled the late marchioness ? 

' O, ma'amselle I ' said she, ' how came it to 
strike me so the instant I saw it, if it was not 
my lady's likeness ? Ah I ' added she, taking 
up the miniature, ' these are her own blue 
eyes — looking so sweet and so mild 1 and 
there is her very look, such as I have often 
seen it, when she had sat thinking for a long 
while ; and then the tears would often steal 
down her cheeks, — but she never would com- 
plain I It was that look, so meek, as it were, 
and resigned, that used to break my heart, and 
make me love her so 1' 

'T^tQXh^^r said Emily solemnly, I am 



THE MYSTERIRS OF UDOLPHO. 79 

interested in the cause of that grief— more so, ' And ought not you first to tell me, 
perhaps, than you may imagine ; and I entreat ma'amselle, how this picture fell into your 
that you will no longer refuse to indulge my hands, and the reasons you say you have for 
curiosity — it is not a common one. ' curiosity about my lady ? ' 

As Lmily said this, she remembered the ' Why, no, Doroth^,' replied Emily, recol- 
papers with which the picture had beenfound, lecting herself ; ' I have also particular reasons 
and had scarcely a doubt that they had con- for observing silence on these subjects, at least 
cemed the Marchioness de Villeroi : but with till I know further ; and remember I do not 
this supposition came a scruple, whether she promise ever to speak upon them : therefore, 
ought to inquire further on a subject which do not let me induce you to satisfy my curiosity, 
might prove to be the same that her father from an expectation that I shall gratify yours, 
had so carefully endeavoured to conceal. What I may judge proper to conceal does not 
Her ciuiosity concerning the marchioness, concern myself alone, or I should have less 
powerful as it was, it is probable she would scruple in revealing it : let a confidence in my 
now have resisted, as she had formerly done honour alone persuade you to disclose what I 
on unwarily observing the few terrible words request.' 

in the papers, «which had never since been ' Well, lady !' replied Dorothy after along 
erased from her memory, had she been certain muse, during which her eyes were fixed upon 
that the history of that lady was the subject Emily, ' you seem so much interested — ^and 
of those papers, or that such simple particu- this picture, and that face of yoiu^, make me 
lars only as it was probable Doroth^ could think you have some reason to be so, — that I 
relate, were included in her father's command, will trust you, and tell some things that I 
What was known to her, could be no secret never told before to anybody but my husband, 
to many other persons ; and since it appeared though there are people who have suspected 
very unlikely that St. Aubert should attempt as much. I will tell you the particulars of my 
to conceal what Emily might learn by ordinary lady's death, too, and some of my own sus- 
means, she at length concluded that, if the picions ; but you must first promise me, by 

papers had related to the story of the marchio- all the saints ' 

ness, it was not those circumstances of it Emily, interrupting her, solemnly promised 
which Doroth^e could disclose, that he had never to reveal what should be confided to 
thought sufficiently important to wish to have her, without Doroth^e's consent, 
concealed : she therefore no longer hesitated * But there is the horn, ma'amselle, sound- 
to make the inauiries that might lead to the ing for dinner,' said Dorothdc : ' I must be 
gratification of her curiosity. gone.' 

• Ah, ma'amselle ! ' said Dorothy, • it is a ' When shall I see you again ?' inquired 
sad story, and cannot be told now ; — ^but what Emily. 

am I saying?— I never will tell it. Many Doroth^e mused, and then replied, 'Why, 

years have passed since it happened ; and I madam, it may make people curious, if it is 

never loved to talk of the marchioness to any known I am so much in your apartment ; and 

body but my husband. He lived in the family that I should be sorry for; so I will come 

at that time, as well as myself, a-nd he knew when I am least likely to be observed. I 

many particulars from me which nobody else have little leisure in the day, and I shall have 

did ; for I was about the person of my lady a good deal to say ; so, if you please ma'am, 

in her last illness, and saw and heard as much, I will come when the family are all in bed.' 

or more than my lord himself. Sweet saint ! 'That will suit me very well,' replied Emily ; 

how patient she was ! When she died, I * remember then, to-night ' 

thought I could have died with her.' 'Aye, that is well remembered,' said 

• Doroth^e,' said EmUy, interrupting her, Doroth^ : 'I fear I cannot come to-night, 

• what you shall tell, you may depend upon madam ; for there will be the dance of the 
it, shall never be disclosed by me. I have, I vintage, and it will be late before the servants 
repeat it, particular reasons for wishing to be go to rest ; for when they once set in to 
informed on this subject, and am willing to dance, they will keep it up, in the cool of the 
bind myself, in the most solemn manner, never air, till morning : at least, it used to be so in 
to mention what you shall wish me to conceal.' my time.' 

Oorothde seemed surprised at the earnest- ' Ah ! is it the dance of the vintage ?' said 

ness of Emily's manner, and, after regard- Emily with a deep sigh, remembering that it 

ing her for some moments in silence, said, was on the evening of this festival, in the pre- 

• Young lady ! that look of yours pleads for ceding year, that St. Aubert and herself had 
you — it is so like my dear mistress's, that I arrived in the neighbourhood of Chateau-le- 
can almost fancy I see her before me : if you Blanc. She paused a moment, overcome by 
were her daughter, you could not remind me the sudden recollection ; and then, recovering 
of her more. But dinner will be ready ; had herself, added — ' But this dance is in the open 
you not better go down?' woods; you, therefore, will not be wanted, 

• You will first promise to grant ray request,' and can easily come to me.' 

said Emily D^roth^e replied that *bft\\asiV3^'«w^M5jc9^- 



So THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

lomcd to be present at the dance of the depressed to permit her to engage in the pre- 

vintage, and she did not wish to be absent sent festivity, which called to her remembrance 

how : • But if I can get away, madam, I will,' that of the preceding vear, when St Aubert 

said she. was living, and of the mdancholy scenes 

Emily then hastened to the dining-room, which had immediately followed it 

where the count conducted himself with the Overcome by these recollections, she at 

courtesy which is inseparable from true dig- length left the spot and walked slowly into 

nity, and of which the countess frequently the woods, where the softened music, floating 

practised little, though her manner to Emily at a distance, soothed her melancholy mind, 

was an exception to her usual habit. But if The moon threw a mellow light among the 

she retained few of the ornamental virtues, foliage ; the ah: was balmy and cool ; and 

she cherished other qualities which she seemed Emily, lost in thought, strolled on without ob- 

to consider invaluable : she had dismissed the serving whither, till she perceived the sound 

grace of modesty ; but then she knew per- sinking afar off, and an awful stillness around 

fectly well how to manage the stare of assur- her, except that, sometimes, the nightingale 

ance : her manners had little of the tempered beguiled the silence with 

sweetness which is necessary to render the , ^^^^ , ^^ 

female character mterestmg ; but she could h » j j 

occasionally throw into them an affectation of At length she found herself near the avenue 

spirits which seemed to triumph over every which, on the night of her father's arrival, 

person who approached her. In the country, Michael had attempted to pass in search of a 

however, she generally affected an elegant house, which was still nearly as wild and 

languor, that persuaded her almost to faint desolate as it had then appeared; for the 

when her favourite read to her a story of fie- count had been so much engaged in directing 

titious sorrow ; but her countenance suffered other improvements, that he had neglected to 

no change when living objects of distress giveordersconcerning this extensive approach; 

solicited her charity, and her heart beat with and the road was yet broken, and the trees 

no transport to the thought of giving them overloaded with their own luxuriance, 

instant relief : she was a stranger to the As she stood surveying it, and remembering 

highest luxury of which, perhaps, the human the emotions which sne had formerhr suffered 

mind can l)e sensible — for her benevolence there, she suddenly recollected the figure that 

had never yet called smiles upon the face of had been seen stealing among the trees, and 

misery. which had returned no answer to Michael's 

In the evening, the count with all his family, repeated calls ; and she experienced some- 
except the countess and Mademoiselle Beam, what of the fear that had then assailed her, for 
went to the woods to witness the festivity of it did not appear improbable that these deep 
the peasants. The scene was in a glade ; woods were occasionally the haunt of ban- 
where the trees, opening, formed a circle ditti ; she therefore turned back ; and was 
round the turf they highly overshadowed, hastily pursuing her way to the dancers, when 
Between their branches, vines loaded with ripe she heard steps approaching from the avenue ; 
clusters were hung in gay festoons ; beneath and being still beyond the call of the peasants 
were tables with fruit, wine, cheese, and other on the green, for she could neither hear their 
rural fare, and seats for the count and his voices nor their music, she quickened her 
family. At a little distance were benches for pace : but the persons following gained fast 
the elder peasants ; few of whom, however, upon her ; and at length distinguishing the 
could forbear to join the jocund dance, which voice of Henri, she walked leisurely till he 
began soon after sunset ; when several of sixty came up. He expressed some surprise at 
tripped it with almost as much glee and aiiy meeting her so far from the company : and 
lightness as those of sixteen. on her saying that the pleasant moonlight 

The musicians, who sat carelessly on the had beguiled her to walk further than she in- 

•grass at the foot of a tree, seemed inspired by tended, an exclamation burst from the lips of 

the sound of their own instruments, which his companion, and she thought she heard 

were chiefly flutes and a kind of long guitar. Valancourt speak ! It was indeed he ! and 

I icliind stood a boy flourishing a tambourine, the meeting was such as may be imagined, 

and dancing a solo, except that, as he some- between persons so affectionate, and so long 

limes gaily tossed the instrument, he tripped separated, as they had been, 

among the other dancers : whon his antic In the joy of these moments Emily forgot 

gestures called forth a broader laugh, and all her past sufferings ; and Valancourt seemed 

heightened the rustic spirit of the scene. to have forgotten that any person but Emily 

The count was highly delighted with the existed ; while Henri was a silent and aston- 

happiness he witnessed, to which his boimty ished spectator of the scene. 

had largely contributed; and the Lady Valancourt asked a thousand questions con- 

Blanche joined the dance with a young gentle- cerning herself and Montoni, which there was 

nian of her father's party. Du PonlrccvuesVed ivo V\vv\<i vq auswer ; but she learned that her 

Emily's hand; but her spirits were IQO xauc\i \^VX<ix>ai3A"^^^ ^^^^^«\Vi^^.n^, while be 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 8i 

was on the way to Gascony ; where, however, tinctly as possible, of the present loss of 
at length, it informed him of her arrival in Madame Montoni's estates, and of the little 
France ; and he had immediately set out for reason there was to expect their restoration. 
Languedoc. On reaching the monastery At lengthValancourtremained lost in thought, 
whence she had dated this letter, he found, to and then some secret cause seemed to over- 
his extreme disappointment, that the gates come him with anguish. Again he abruptly 
were already closed for the night ; and be- left her. When he returned she perceived 
lieving that he should not see Emily till the that he had been weeping, and tenderly 
morrow, he was returning to his little inn, begged that he would compose himself. 'My 
with the intention of writing to her, when he sufferings are all passed now,' said she : ' for 
was overtaken by Henri, with whom he had I have escaped from tha tyranny of Mon- 
been intimate at Paris, and was led to her, toni ; and I see you well — let me also see you 
whom he was secretly lamenting that he happy.' 
should -not see till the following day. Valancourt was more agitated than before. 

Emily, with Valancourt and Henri, now ' I am unworthy of you, Emily^' said, he ; 'I 
returned to the green ; where the latter pre- am unworthy of you ;' — words by his manner 
sented Valancourt to the count ; who, she of uttering which Emily was then more 
fancied, received him with less than his usual shocked than by their import. She fixed on 
benignity, though it appeared that they were him a mournful and inquiring eye. ' Do not 
not strangers to each other. He was invited, look thus on me,' said he, turning away, and 
however, to partake of the diversions of the pressing her hand : ' I cannot bear those 
evening ; and when he had paid his respects looks.' 

to the count, and while the dancers continued ' I would ask,' said Emily in a gentle but 
their festivity, he seated himself by Emily, agitated voice, ' the meaning of your words, 
and conversed without restraint. The lights but I perceive that the question would distress 
which were hung among the trees under you now. Let us talk on other subjects. To- 
which they sat, allowed her a more perfect morrow, perhaps, you may be more com- 
view of the countenance she had so frequently posed. Observe those moonlight woods, and 
in absence endeavoured to recollect, and she the towers which appear obsciu^ly in the per- 
perceived with some regret that it was not the spective. You used to be a great admirer of 
same as when last she saw it. There was all landscape ; and I have heard you say that the 
its wonted intelligence and fire ; but it had faculty of deriving consolation under mis- 
lost much of the simplicity, and somewhat of fortune, from the sublime prospects which 
the open benevolence, that used to characterise neither oppression nor poverty withholds from 
it. Still, however, it was an interesting coun- us, was the peculiar blessing of the innocent. ' 
tenance ; but Emily thought she perceived, at Valancourt was deeply affected. 'Yes,' re- 
intervals, anxiety contract, and melancholy plied he ; ' I had once a taste for innocent 
fix, the features of Valancourt : sometimes, and elegant delights — I had once an uncor- 
too, he fell into a momentary musing, and rupted heart !' Then checking himself, he 
then appeared anxious to dissipate thought ; added, • Do you remember our journey to- 
while at others, as he fixed his eyes on gether in the Pyrenees?' 

Emily, a sudden kind of horror seemed to 'Can I forget it?' said Emily.' 'Would 

cross his mind. In her he perceived the same that I could !' he replied ; — ' that was the hap- 
goodness and beautiful simplicity that had piest period of my life ; I then loved, with en- 
charmed him on their first acquaintance. The thusiasm, whatever was truly great or good. ' 
bloom of her cpuntenance was somewhat It was some time before Emily could repress 
faded, but all its sweetness remained ; and it her tears, and try to command her emotions, 
was rendered more interesting than ever, by 'If you wish to forget that journey, 'said she, 'it 
the faint expression of melancholy that some- must certainly be my wish to forget it also. ' She 
times mingled with her smile. paused, and then added, ' You make me very 

At his request she related the most impor- uneasy ; but this is not the time for further in- 
tant circumstances that had occurred to her quiry. Yet how can I bear to believe, even 
since she left France ; and emotions of pity for a moment, that you are less worthy of my 
and indignation alternately prevailed in his esteem than formerly ? I have still sufiicient 
mind, when he heard how much she had confidence in your candour to believe that, 
suffered from the villany of Montoni. More when I shall ask for an explanation, you will 
than once, when she was speaking of his con- give it me.' ' Yes,' said Valancourt ; 'yes, 
duct, of which the guilt was rather softened Emily ; I have not yet lost my candour : if I 
than exaggerated by her representation, he had, I could better have disguised my emo- 
started from his seat and walked away, appa- tions on learning what were your sufferings— 
renlly overcome as much by self-accusation as your virtues ; while I — but I will say no more, 
by resentment. Her sufferings alone were I did not mean to have said even so much — I 
mentioned in the few words which he could have been surprised into the self-accusation, 
address to her ; and he listened not to the Tell me, Emily, that you will not forget thax 
account, whicli she was careful to givf as dig- journey— will uq\ \n&\x V4 Vs^^i^ ^^^-'s»§i.^. 



82 THE MYSTERIES OF l^DOLFHO, 

shall be tranquil. I would not lose the re- her emotion. — ' Because,' replied the count, 

membranoe of it for the whole earth.' ' I think him not worthy of your favour.' 

' How contradictory is this !' said Emily ; Emily, greatly agitated, entreated further ex- 

• but we may be overheard. My recollection planation. 'I will give it,' said he, * if you 
of it shall depend upon yours : I will endea- will believe that nothing but a strong interest 
vour to forget, or to recollect it, as you may in your welfare could induce me to hazard 
do. Let us join the count.' 'Tell me first,' that assertion.'— 'I must believe so, sir,' re- 
said Valancourt, ' that you forgive the uneasi- pled Emily. 

ness I have occasioned you this evening, and ' But let us rest under these trees,* continued 

that you will still love me.' ' I sincerely forgive the count, observing the paleness of her coun- 

you,' replied Emily. ' You best know whether tenance : ' here is a seat — ^you are fatigued,-' 

i shall continue to love you, for you know They sat down ; and the count proceeded— 

whether you deserve my esteem. At present, ' Many young ladies, circumstanced as you 

I will believe that you do. It is unnecessary are, would think my conduct on this occasion, 

to say,' added she, observing his dejection, and on so short an acquaintance, impertinent, 

• how much pain it would give me to believe instead of friendly. From what I have observed 
otherwise. — The young lady who approaches of your temper and understanding, I do not fear 
is the count's daughter. ' such a return from you : our acquaintance has 

Valancourt and Emily now joined the Lady been short, but long enough to make me es- 
Blanche, and the party soon after sat down teem you, and feel a lively interest in your 
with the count, his son, and the Chevalier du happiness. You deserve to be very happy, suod 
Pont, at a banquet spread under a gay awning I trust you will be so. ' Emily sighed softly, and 
beneath the trees. At a table also were bowed her thanks. The count paused again, 
seated several of the most venerable of the ' I am unpleasantly circumstanced,' said he ; 
count's tenants ; and it was a festive repast — ' but an opportunity of rendering you impOT- 
to all but Valancomrt and Emily. When the tant service shall overcome inferior considera- 
count retired to the chateau, he did not invite tions. Will you inform me of the manner of 
Valancourt to accompany him ; who, there- your first acquaintance with Uie Chevalier 
fore, took leave of Emily, and retired to his Valancourt, if the subject is not too painfol?^ 
solitary inn for the night : meanwhile, she Emily briefly related the accident of their 
soon withdrew to her own apartment, where meeting in the presence of her father ; and then 
she mused, with deep anxiety and concern, so earnestly entreated the count not to hesi- 
on his behaviour, and on the count's recep- tate in declaring what he knew, that he per- 
tion of him. Her attention was thus so wholly ceived the violent emotion against which she 
engaged, that she forgot Dorothde and her was contending, and, regarding her with a 
appointment, till morning was far advanced ; look of tender compassion, considered how he 
when, knowing that the good old woman might communicate his information with the 
would not come, she retired for a few hours to least pain to his anxious auditor, 
repose. • The chevalier and my son,' said he, ' woe 

On the following day, when the count had introduced to each other at the table of a 
accidentally joined Emily in one of the walks, brother officer ; at whose house I also met 
they talked of the festival of the preceding him, and invited him to my own whenever he 
evening ; and this led him to a mention of should be disengaged. I did not then know 
Valancourt. 'That is a young man of talent,' that he had formed an acquaintance with a 
said he ; ' you were formerly acquainted with set of men, a disgrace to their species, who 
him, I perceive ?' Emily said that she was. live by plunder, and pass their lives in con- 

• He was introduced to me at Paris,' said the tinual debauchery. I knew several of the 
count, ' and I was much pleased with him on chevalier's family resident at Paris, and con- 
our first acquaintance.' He paused, and Emily sidered them as sufficient pledges for his 
trembled, between the desire of hearing more introduction to my own. But you are ill ; I 
and the fear of showing the count that she will leave the subject.: 'No, sir,* said Emily; 
felt an interest on the subject. ' May I ask,' ' I beg you will proceed : I am only dis- 
said he at length, ' how long you have known tressed. ' — ' Only /' said the count with em- 
Monsieur Valancourt ?' ' Will you allow me phasis. ' However, I will proceed. I soon 
to ask your reason for the question, sir?' learned that these, his associates, had drawn 




,.._--, - — .large 

Monsieur Valancourt admires you. In that, sums at the gaming-table ; he became infatu- 
however, there is nothing extraordinary : every ated with play ; and was mined. I spoke 
person who sees you must do the same. I am tenderly of this to his friends, who assured me 
above using common-place compliments : I that they had remonstrated with him till they 
5peair with sincerity. What I Icar.is, ihalVie were weary. I aftenrards learned that, in 

IS a favoured admirer !' • Why do you fear coii"=^\(iettv\]vo\vcA\ivs»\a.\s.\\.t^for play, which were 

U, SJjr?' said £mily, endeavouring to c.oT\c.e;\\ ^eneroXVj ^M^<i^"s,\\i5k. ^\vrx\ >mvss^<5ss^w ^j^^ 



THE laVSTSRlES OP VDOLPtiO. 



83 



tricks of villany — that in consideration of folly, which he may never repeat. If you had 
these, the party had initiated him into the known the justness of his former pnncipleS) 
secrets of their trade, and allotted him a share you would allow for my present incredulity.' 
of their profits.' — ' Impossible 1' said Emily 'Alas!' observed the count, 'it is difficult 
suddenly ; — • but pardon me, sir, I scarcely to believe that which will make us wretched, 
know what I say ; — allow for the distress of But I will not soothe you by flattering and false 
my mind. I must, indeed I must, believe that hopes. Weall know how fascinating the vice of 
you have not been truly informed : the cheva- gaming is, and how difficult it is also to conquer 
lier had doubtless enemies who misrepresented habit. The chevialier might, perhaps, reform 
him. ' — • I should be most happy to believe for a while ; but he would soon relapse into 
so,' replied the count ; ' but I cannot. No- dissipation — for I fear not only the bonds of 
thing short of conviction, and a regard for habit would be powerful, but that his morals 
your welfare, could have urged me to repeat are corrupted. And — why should I conceal 
these unpleasant reports.' from you that play is not his only vice? — he 

Emily was silent. She recollected Valan- appears to have a taste for every vicious 
court's sayings on the preceding evening, pleasiu-e.' 

whiqh discovered the pangs of self-reproach, The count hesitated, and paused ; while 
and seemed to confirm all that the count had Emily endeavoured to support herself, as 
related. Yet she had not fortitude enough to with increasing perturbation shp expected 
dare conviction ; her heart was overwhelmed what he might further say. A long pause of 
with anguish at the mere suspicion of his guilt, silence ensued, during which he was visibly 
and she could not endure a belief of it. After agitated. At length he said, • It would be a 
a long silence the count said, ' I perceive, and cruel delicacy that could prevail with me to 
can allow for your want of conviction. It is be silent — and I will inform you that the che- 
necessary I should give some proof of what I valier's extravagance has brought him twice 
have asserted ; but this I cannot do, without into the prisons of Paris ; from whence he was 
subjecting one who is very dear to me to dan- last extricated, as I was told upon authority 



ger.' — ' What is the danger you apprehend, 
sir?' said Emily. ' If I can prevent it, you 
may safely confide in my honour. ' — * On your 
honour I am certain I can rely,' said the 
count; 'but can I trust your fortitude ? Do 
you think you can resist the solicitation of a 
favoured admirer when he pleads in affliction 
for the name of one who has robbed him of a 
blessing?' — ' I shall not be exposed to such a 
temptation, sir,' said Emily with modest pride ; 
• for I cannot favour one whom I must no 
longer esteem. I, however, readily give my 
word.' Tears in the meantime contradicted 
her first assertion ; and she felt that time and 
effort only could eradicate an affection which 
had been formed on virtuous esteem, and 
cherished by habit and difficulty. 

' I will trust you then,' said the count ; 'for 



which I cannot doubt, by a well-known 
Parisian countess, \vith whom he continued 
to reside when I left Paris.' 

He paused again : and, looking at Emily, 
perceived her countenance change, and that 
she was falling from the seat : he caught her ; 
but she had fainted, and he called loud for 
aid. They were, however, beyond the hear- 
ing of his servants at the chateau, and he 
feared to leave her while he went thither for 
assistance, yet knew not how otherwise to 
obtain it ; till a fountain at no great distance 
caught his eye, and he endeavoured to support 
Emily against the tree under which she had 
been sitting, while he went thither for water. 
•Again he was perplexed, for he had nothing 
near him in which water could be brought ; 
but while, with increased anxiety, he watched 



conviction is necessary to your future peace, her, he thought he perceived in her coun- 
and cannot, I perceive, be obtained without tenance symptoms of returning life, 
this confidence. My son has too often been an It was long, however, before she revived, 
eye-witness of the chevalier's ill conduct ; he ai\d then she found herself supported — not by 
was very near being drawn in by it : he was, the count — but by Valancoiut, who was ob- 
indeed, drawn in to the commission of many serving herwith looks of earnest apprehension, 
follies, but I rescued him from guilt and de- and who now spoke to her in a tone tremulous 
struction. Judge then, Mademoiselle St. Au- with his anxiety. At the sound of his well- 
bert, whether a father, who had nearly lost known voice, she raised her eyes ; but presently 
his only son by the example of the chevalier, closed them, and a faintness again came over 
has not, from conviction, reason to warn her. 

those whom he esteems against trusting their The count, with a look somewhat Stem, 
happiness in such hands. I have myself seen waved him to withdraw ; but he only sighed 
the chevalier engaged in deep play with men heavily, and called on the name of Emily, as 
whom I almost shuddered to look upon. If he again held the water that had been brought 
you still doubt, I will refer you to my son.' to her lips. On the count's repeating his 
• I must not doubt what you have yourself action, and accompanying it with words, 
witnessed,' replied Emily, sinking with grief ; Valancourt answered him with a look of deep 
' or what you assert. But the chevalier has, resentment, and refused to leave the place till 
perhaps, been drawn only into a transient she should revive, or to resign her for a ma- 



84 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO. 



ment to the care of any person. In the next 
instant his conscience seemed to inform him 
of what had been the subject of the count's 
conversation with Emily, and indignation 
flashed in his eyes : but it was quickly re- 
pressed, and succeeded by an expression of 
serious anguish, that induced the count to 
regard him with more pity than resentment, 
and the view of which so much affected Emily, 
when she again revived, that she yielded to. 
the weakness of tears : but she soon restrained 
them ; and, exerting her resolution to appear 
recovered, she rose, thanked the count and 
Henri, with whom Valancourt had entered 
the garden, for their care, and moved towards 
the chateau without noticing Valancourt ; 
who, heart-struck by her manner, exclaimed 
in a low voice — ' Good God ! how have I 
deserved this?— what has been said to occasion 
this change ?' 

Emily, without replying, but with increased 
emotion, quickened her steps. ' What has 
thus disordered you, Emily?' said he, as he 
still walked by her side : ' give me a few 
moments' conversation, I entreat you ; — I am 
very miserable !' 

Though this was spoken in a low voice, it 
was overheard by the count ; who immediately 
replied, that Mademoiselle St. Aubert was 
then too much indisposed to attend to any 
conversation, but that he would venture to 
promise she would see Monsieur Valancourt 
on the morrow, if she was better. 

Valancourt's cheek was crimsoned : he 
looked haughtily at the count, and then at 
Emily, with successive expression of surprise, 
grief, and supplication, which she could 
neither misunderstand nor resist ; and she 
said languidly, ' I shall be better to-morrow ; 
and, if you wish to accept the count's permis- 
sion, I will see you then.' 

' See me 1 ' exclaimed Valancourt, as he 
threw a glance of mingled pride and resent- 
ment upon the count ; and then, seeming to 
recollect himself, he added— ' But I will come, 
madam ; I will accept the count's permission' 

When they reached the door of the chateau, 
he lingered a moment, for his resentment was 
now fled ; and then, with a look so expressive 
of tenderness and grief that Emily's heart was 
not proof against it, he bade her good morn- 
ing, and, bowing slightly to the count, dis- 
appeared. 

Emily withdrew to her own apartment, 
under such oppression of heart as she had 
seldom known ; when she endeavoured to 
recollect all that the count had told, to 
examine the probability of the circumstances 
he himself believed, and to consider of her 
future conduct towards Valancourt. But when 
she attempted to think, her mind refused con- 
trol, and she could only feel that she was 
miserable. One moment she sunk under the 
coTmctXon that Valancourt was no longet iVve 
same whom she had so tenderly \oveA— x\v^ 



idea of whom had hitherto supported hfer 
under affliction, and cheered her with the hope 
of happier days — but a fallen, a worthless 
character, whom she must teach herself to 
despise — if she could not forget : then, unable 
to endure this terrible supposition, she rejected 
it, and disdained to believe him capable of 
conduct such as the count had described ; to 
whom she believed he had been misrepre- 
sented by some artful enemy : and there were 
moments when she even ventured to doubt 
the integrity of the count himself, and to 
suspect &at he was influenced by some selfish 
motive, to break her connection with Valan- 
court. But this was the error of an instant 
only : the count's character, which she had 
heard spoken of by Du Pont and many other 
persons, and had herself observed, enabled 
her to judge, and forbade the supposition : 
had her confidence, indeed, been less, Uiere 
appeared to be no temptation to betray him 
into conduct so treacherous and so crueL Nor 
did reflection suffer her to preserve the hope 
that Valancourt had been misrepresented to 
the count, who had said that he spoke ctuefiy 
from his own observation, and from his son's 
experience. She must part from Valancourt, 
therefore, for ever ! — for what of either 
happiness or tranquiUity could she expect, 
with a man whose tastes were d^enoated 
into low inclinations, and to whom vice was 
become habitual? whom she must no loiter 
esteem, though the remembrance of what he 
once was, and the long habit of loving Mm, 
would render it very difficult for her to despise 
him ! 

' O Valancourt !' she would exclaim, * having 
been separated so long, do we meet only to be 
miserable ! — only to part for ever !' 

Amidst all the tumult of her mind, she 
remembered pertinaciously the seeming can- 
dour and simplicity of his conduct on the 
preceding night ; and, had she dared to trust 
her own heart, it would have led her to hope 
much from this. Still she could not resolve to 
dismiss him for ever, without obtaining ftirther 
proof of his ill conduct ; yet she saw no pro- 
bability of procuring it — if, indeed, proof more 
positive was possible. Something, however, 
it was necessary to decide upon ; and she 
almost determined to be guided in her opinion 
solely by the manner with which Valancourt 
should receive her hints concerning his late 
conduct. 

Thus passed the hours till dinner-time; 
when Emily, struggling against the pressure 
of her grief, dried her tears, and joined the 
family at table ; where the coimt presened 
towards her the most deUcate attention ; but 
the countess and Mademoiselle Beam having 
looked, for a moment, with surprise, on her 
dejected countenance, began, as usual, to talk 
of trifles; while the eyes of Lady Blanche 
asked much of her friend, who could only rerfy 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



H 



£mily withdrew as soon after dinner as 
possible, and was followed by the Lady 
Blanche ; whose anxious inquiries, however, 
she found herself quite unequal to answer, 
and whom she entreated to spare her on the 
subject of her distress. To converse on any 
topic was now, indeed, so extremely jpainful 
to her, that she soon gave up the attempt ; 
and Blanche left her, with pity for the sorrow 
which she perceived she had no power to 
assuage. 

Emily secretly determined to go to her 
convent in a day or two ; for company, espe- 
cially that of the countess and Mademoiselle 
Bearn, was intolerable to her in the present 
state of her spirits : and in the retirement of 
the convent, as well as in the kindness erf" the 
abbess, she hoped to recover the command of 
her mind, and to teach it resignation to the 
event which, she too plainly perceived, was 
approaching. 

To have lost Valancourt by death, or to 
have seen him married to a rival, would, she 
thought, have given her less anguish than a 
conviction of his unworthiness, which must 
terminate in miseiy to himself, and which 
robbed her even of the solitary image her 
heart so long had cherished. These painful 
reflections were interrupted for a moment by 
a note from Valancourt, written in evident 
distraction of mind, entreating that she would 
permit him to see her on the approaching 
evening, instead of the following morning — a 
request which occasioned her so much agita- 
tion, that she was unable to answer it : she 
wished to see him, and to terminate her 
present state of suspense, yet shrunk from 
the interview ; and incapable of deciding for 
herself, she at length sent to beg a few 
moments' conversation with the count in his 
library ; where she delivered to him the note, 
and requested his advice. After reading it, he 
said, that if she believed herself well enouglj 
to support the interview, his opinion was, that 
for the relief of both parties it ought to take 
place that evening. 'His affection for you 
cannot be doubted,' added the count; 'and 
he appears so much distressed, and you, my 
amiable friend, are so ill at ease — that the 
sooner the affair is decided, the better. ' 

Emily replied, therefore, to Valancourt, that 
she would see him ; and then exerted herself 
in endeavours to attain fortitude and com- 
posure to bear her through the approaching 
scene — a scene so afflictingly the reverse of 
any to which she had looked forward I 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

* Is all the counsel that we two have sharec, 

the hours that we have spent, 

When we have chid the hasty-footed Time 
For parting us Oh I and is aJl forgot ? 

And will you rend our ancient love asunder ?' 
Midsummer Night's Dream. 

In the evening, when Emily was at length 
informed that Count de Villefort requested to 
see her, she guessed that Valancourt was be- 
low ; and endeavouring to assume composure 
and to re-coUect all her spirits, she rose and 
left the apartment : but on reaching the door 
of the library, where she imagined him to be, 
her emotion returned with such energy, that, 
fearing to trust herself in the room, she re- 
turned into the hall, where she continued for 
a considerable time, unable to command her 
agitated spirits. 

When she could recall them, she found in 
the library Valancourt seated with the count, 
who both rose on her entrance ; but she did 
not dare *to look at Valancourt ; and the 
count, having led her to a chair, immediately 
withdrew. 

Emily remained with her eyes fixed on the 
floor, under such oppression of -heart that 
she could not speak, and with difficulty 
breathed ; while Valancourt threw himseLf 
into a chair beside her, and, sighing heavily, 
continued silent, when, had she raised her ^ 
eyes, she would have perceived the violent 
emotion he suffered. 

At length, in a tremulous voice, he said, * I 
have solicited to see you this evening, that I 
might, at least, be spared the further torture 
of suspense, which your altered manner had 
occasioned me, and which the hints I have 
just received from the count have in part ex- 
plained. I perceive I have enemies, Emily, 
who envied me my late happiness, and who 
have been busy in searching out the means 
to destroy it ; I perceive, too, that time and 
absence have weakened the affection you once 
felt for me, and that you can now easily be 
taught to forget me.' 

His last words faltered ; and Emily, less 
able to speak than before, continued silent. 

' O what a meeting is this !' exclaimed 
Valancourt starting from his seat, and pacing 
the room with hurried ste^s ; ' what a meeting 
is this, after our long— long separation !' 
Again he sat down, and, after the struggle 
of a moment, he added in a firm but des- 
pairing tone, • This is too much — I cannot 
bear it 1 Enjily, will you not speak to me ?' 

He covered his face with his hand, as if to 
conceal his emotion, and took Emily's, which 
she did not withdraw. Her 4ears could no 
longer be restrained : and when he looked up, 
and perceived that she was weeping, all his 
tenderness returned, and a gleam of hope ap- 
peared to cross his mind, for he excla.\j»s.<ix 
• O I you do ^\\.^ ifta, \Jsx<i'a.,^QJVi.^<i \^H^\as.\ 



6($ 



THE MY3TERIMS OF VDOLPHO, 



-let me 



Yes, you are still my own Emily- 
believe those tears that tell me so l' 

Emily now made an effort to recover her 
firmness, and, hastily drying them, 'Yes,' 
• said she, ' I do pity you— I weep for you— 
but ought I to think of you with affection ? 
You may remember that yester evening I 
said I had stiTl sufficient confidence in vour 
candour to believe, that when I should re- 
quest an explanation of your words you 
would give it. This explanation is now un- 
necessary, I understand them too well : but 
prove, at least, that your candour is deserv- 
mg of the confidence I give it, when I ask 
you, whether you are conscious of being the 
same estimable Valancourt — whom I once 
loved. ' 

• Once loved !' cried he — ' the same — the 
same !' He paused in extreme emotion, and 
then added, in a voice at once solemn and de- 
jected, — ' No — I am not the same ! — I am 
lost — I am no longer worthy of you I' 

He again concealed his face. Emily was 
too much affected by this honest confession to 
reply immediately ; and while she struggled 
to overcome the pleadings of her heart, and 
to act with the decisive firmness which was 
necessary for her future peace, she perceived 
all the danger of trusting long to her resolu- 
tion in the presence of Valancourt, and was 
anxious to conclude an interview that tortured 
^ them both : yet when she considered that 
this was probably their last meeting, her 
fortitude sunk at once, and she experienced 
only emotions of tenderness and of despon- 
dency. 

Valancourt, meanwhile, lost in those of 
remorse and grief, which he had neither the 
power nor the will to express, sat insensible 
almost of the presence of Emily, his features 
still concealed, and his breast agitated by con- 
vulsive sighs. 

'Spare me the necessity,' said Emily, re- 
collecting her fortitude, ' spare me the neces- 
sity of mentioning those circumstances of 
your conduct which oblige me to break our 
connection for ever. We must part — I now 
see you for the last time. ' 

• Impossible !' cried Valancourt, roused 
from his deep silence ; * You cannot mean 
what you say I — you cannot mean to throw 
me from you for ever !' 

• We must part,' repeated Emily with em- 
phasis — ' and that for ever ! Your own con- 
duct has made this necessary.' 

'This is the count's determination,' said 
he haughtily, ' not yours, and I shall inquire 
by what autliority he interferes between us. ' 
He now rose, and walked about the room 
in great emotion." 

• Let me save you from this error,' said 
Emily not less agitated — ' it is my determina- 
i\on, and, if you reflect a moment on your 

7afe conduct, you will perceive thai my luvwi^ 
peace requires it ' 



' Your future peace requires that we should 
part — ^part for ever I' said Valancourt : • How 
little did I ever expect to hear you say so I' 

' And how little did I expect that it would 
be necessary for me to say so 1' rejoined 
Emily, while her voice softened into tender- 
ness, and her tears flowed again. — 'That you 
— you, Valancourt, would ever fall from my 
esteem I' 

He was silent a moment, as if overwhelmed 
by the consciousness of no longer des^ving 
this esteem, as well as the certamty of having 
lost it; and then, with impassioned grief, 
lamented the criminality of his late conduct, 
and the misery to which it had reduced him, 
till, overcome by a recollection of the past 
and a conviction of the future, he b^u^t 
into tears, and uttered only deep and broken 
sighs. 

The remorse he had expressed, and the 
distress he suffered, could not be witnessed 
by Emily with indifference ; and had she not 
called to her recollection all the circumstances 
of which Count de Villefort had informed 
her, and all he had said of the danger df con- 
fiding in repentance formed under the in- 
fluence of passion, she might perhaps have 
trusted to the assurances of her heart, and 
have forgotten his misconduct in the tender- 
ness which that repentance excited. 

Valancourt, returning to the chair beskle 
her, at length said, in a subdued voice, ' 'Tis 
true, I ammllen — ^fallen from my own esteem! 
but could you, Emily, so soon, so suddenlf 
resign, if you had not before ceased to love 
me, or, if your conduct was not governed by 
the designs, I will say the selfish designs, <u 
another person? Would you not otherwise 
be willing to hope for my reformation— and 
could you bear, by estranging me from yoa, 
to abandon me to misery — to myself !' — Enuly 
wept aloud. — ' No, Emily — no — you would 
jiol do this if you still loved me. You would 
find your own happiness in saving mine.* 

' There are too many probabilities against 
that hope,' said Emily, ' to justify me in trust- 
ing the comfort of my whole life to it May 
I not also ask, whether you could wish me to 
do this if you really loved me ?' 

* Really loved you I' exclaimed Valancourt 
— 'is it possible you can doubt my love? 
Yet it is reasonable that you should do so^ 
since you see that I am less ready to suffer 
the horror of parting with you, than that of 
involving you in my ruin. Yes, Emily — I am 
ruined-rirreparably ruined — I am involved in 
debts which I can never discharge !' Valan- 
court's look, which was wild as he spoke this, 
soon settled into an expression of gloomy 
despair ; and Emily, while she was com- 
pelled to admire his sincerity, saw, with un- 
utterable anguish, new reasons for fear in the 
suddenness of his feelings, and the extent of 
U\c misery in which they might involve him. 
Mv^T v;»wici xMai\s.vts.» ^Vsa seemed to contend 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 8r 

against her grief, and to struggle for fortitude can you bear that we should part — can you 
to conclude the interview. ' I will not pro- resolve to give up a heart that loves you like 
long these moments,' said she, 'by a conversa- mine — a heart which, though it has erred — 
tion which can answer no good purpose, widely erred — is not irretrievable from error, 
Valancourt, farewell. ' as, you well know, it never can be retrievable 

' You are not going ?' said he wildly, inter- from love ?' Emily made no reply but with 
rupting her — ' You will not leave me thus — her tears. ' Can you,' continued he, ' can 
you will not abandon me even before my mind you forget all our former days of happiness 
has suggested any possibility of compromise and confidence — when I had not a thought 
between the last indulgence of my despair and that I might wish to conceal it from you — 
the endurance of my loss !' Emily was terri- when I had no taste — no pleasures, in which 
fied by the sternness of his look, and said in you did not participate ?' 
a soothing voice, ' You have yourself acknow- ' O do not lead me to the remembrance of 
ledged that it is necessary we should part : — if those days,' said Emily, unless you can teach 
you wish that I should believe you love mc, me to be insensible to the present. I do not 
you will repeat the acknowledgement.' — mcjm to reproach you ; if I did, I should be 
'Never, never,' cried he — 'I was distracted spared these tears; but why will you render 
when I made it. O ! Emily — this is too much ; your present sufferings more conspicuous, by 
— though you are not deceived as to my faults, contrasting them with your former virtues ?' 
you must be deluded into this exasperation 'Those virtues,' said Valancourt, 'might 
against them. The count is the barrier perhaps again be mine, if your affection, 
between us ; but he shall not long remain so.' which nurtured them, was unchanged : but I 
' You are indeed distracted,' said Emily, fear, indeed — I see that you can no longer 
* the count is not your enemy ; on the con- love ; else the happy hours which we have 
trary he is my friend, and that might in some passed together would plead for me, and you 
degree induce you to consider him as yours. ' could not look back upon them unmoved. 
— ' Your friend !' said Valancourt hastily : Yet why should I torture myself with the re- 
' how long has he been your friend, that he membrance — why do I linger here ? Am I 
can so easily make you forget your lover? not ruined— would it not be madness to involve 
Was it he who recommended to your favour you in my misfortunes, even if yotu* heart was 
the Monsieur du Pont, who, you say, accom- still my own? I will not distress you further, 
panied you from Italy, and who, I say, has Yet, before I go, added he in a solemn voice, 
stolen your affections ? But I have no right let me repeat, that whatever may be my 
to question you ; — ^you are your own mistress, destiny — whatever I may be doomed to suffer, 
Du Pont, perhaps, may not long triumph over I must always love you — most fondly love 
my fallen fortunes !' Emily, more frightened you ! I am going, Emily, I am going to leave 
than before by the frantic looks of Valan- you — to leave you for ever !' & he spoke the 
court, said in a tone scarcely audible, ' For last words, his voice trembled, and he threw 
Heaven's sake be reasonable — ^be composed ! himself again into the chair from which he 
Monsieur du Pont is not your rival, nor is the had risen. Emily was utterly unable to leave 
count his advocate. You have no rival ; nor, the room, or to say farewell. All impression 
except yourself, an enemy. My heart is of his criminal conduct and almost of his 
wrung with anguish, which must increase follies was obliterated from her mind, and she 
while your frantic behaviour shows me more was sensible only of pity and grief, 
than ever, that you are no longer the Valan- • My fortitude is gone, ' said Valancourt at 
court I have been accustomed to love.' length ; ' I can no longer even struggle to re- 

He made no reply, but sat with his arms call it. I cannot now leave you — ^I cannot 
rested on the table, and his face concealed by bid you an eternal farewell : say, at least, that 
his hands ; while Emily stood silent and trem- you will see me once again. ' Emily's heart 
bling, wretched for herself, and dreading to was somewhat relieved by the request, and 
leave him in this state of mind. she endeavoured to believe that she ought not 

• O excess of misery !' he suddenly ex- to refuse it. Yet she was embarrassed by 
claimed, ' that I can never lament my suffer- recollecting that she was a visitor in the house 
ings, without accusing myself, nor remember of the count, who could not be pleased by 
you, without recollecting the folly aud the the return of Valancourt. Other considera- 
vice by which I have lost you ! Why was I tions, however, soon overcame this ; and she 
forced to Paris, and why did I yield to allure- granted his request, on the condition that he 
ments, which were to make me despicable for would neither think of the count as his 
ever ? O ! why cannot I look back, without enemy, nor Du Pont as his rival. He then 
interruption, to those days of innocence and left her, with a heart so much lightened by 
peace, the days of our early love?' — The this short respite, that he almost lost every 
recollection seemed to melt his heart, and the former sense of misfortune, 
frenzy of despair yielded to tears. After a Emily withdrew to her own room that she 
long pause, turning towards her and taking might compose her spirits and remove the. 
her hand, he said, in a spftened voice, ' Emily, trapes of her tsaxs, ^\Cv:2cv ^<5f^^ ^w^cssas.-M^ 



88 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



the censorious remarks of the countess and all her fortitude forsook her ; and when, re- 
her favourite, ns woll as excite the curiosity of memberingthe confidence of former times, she 
the rest of the family. She found it, hoyr- thought it impossible that she could renounce 
ever impossible to tranquillize her mind, from Valancourt. His reformation then appeared 
which she could not expel the remembrance certain ; the arguments of Coimt de Villefort 
of the late scene with Valancourt. or the con- were forgotten ; she readily beUeved all she 
sciousness that she was to see him again on wished, and was willmg to encounter anye\'il, 
the morrow. This meeting now appeared rather than that of an immediate separation, 
more terrible to her than the last ; for the in- Thus passed the night in ineflfectual strug- 
confession he had made of his ill gles between affection and reason, and she 



rose in the morning with a mind weakened 
and irresolute, and a frame trembling wih 

illness. 



CHAPTER Xr.. 



genuous 

conduct and his embarrassed circumstances, 
with the strength and tenderness of affection 
which this confession discovered, had deeply 
impressed her, and, in spite of all she had 
heard and believed to his disadvantage, her 
esteem began to return. It frequently ap- 
peared to her impossible that he could have 

been guilty of the depravities reported of him, * Come, weep with me ;— past hope, past cure, past 
which, if not inconsistent with his warmth and help.' 

impetuosity, were entirely so with his candour Romeo and Jouet. 
and sensibihty. Whatever was the criminaUty Valancourt, meanwhile, suffered the tor- 
which had given rise to the reports, she could tiu-es of remorse and despair. The sight of 
not now believe them to be wholly true, nor Emily had renewed all the ardour with which 
that his heart was finally closed against the he first loved her, and which had suffered a 
charms of virtue. The deep consciousness temporary abatement from absence and the 
which he felt, as well as expressed, of his passing scenes of busy life. When, on the 
errors, seemed to justify the opinion ; and, as receipt of her letter, he set out for Langae* 
she understood not the instability of youthful doc, he then knew that his own folly had in- 
dispositions, when opposed by habit, and that volved him in ruin, and it was no part of his 
professions frequently deceive those who design to conceal this from her. But he la- 
make, as well as those who hear them, she mented only the delay which his ill conduct 
might have yielded to the ilattering pcrsua- must give to their marriage, and did not fore- 
sions of her own heart and the pleadings of see that the information could induce her to 
Valancourt, had she not been guided by the su- break their connexion for ever. While the 
perior prudence of the count. lie represented prospect of this separation overwhelmed his 
to her in a clear light the danger of her present mind, before stung with self-reproadi, he 



situation, that of listening to promises of 

amendment made under the influence of 

. strong passion, and the slight hope which 

"could attach to a connexion, whose chance of 



awaited their second interview in a state little 
short of distraction, yet was still inclined to 
hope that his pleadings might prevail upon 
her not to exact it. In the morning he sent 



happiness rested upon the retrieval of ruined to know at what hour she would see liiro ; 



circumstances and the reform of corrupted 
habits. On these accounts he lamented that 
Emily had consented to a second interview ; 
for he saw how much it would shake her 
resolution, and increase the difficulty of her 
conquest. 



and his note arrived when she was with the 
count, who had sought an opportunity of 
again conversing with her of Valancourt ; for 
he perceived the extreme distress of her mind, 
and feared more than ever that her fortitude 
would desert her. Emily having: dismissed 



Her mind was now so entirely occupied by the messenger, the count returned to the sub- 
nearer interests, that she forgot the old house- ject of their late conversation, urging his fear 
keeper, and the promised history which so of Valancourt's entreaties, and again point- 
lately had excited her curiosity, but which ing out to her the lengthened misery Aal 
Dorothy was probably not very anxious to must ensue if she should refuse to encountef 
disclose ; for night came, the hours passed, some present uneasiness. His rep>eatcdargu- 
and she did not appear in Emily's chamber, ments could, indeed, alone have protected her 
With the latter it was a sleepless and dismal from the affection she still felt for Valancourt, 
night : the more she suffered her memory to and she resolved to be governed by them. 

The hour of interview at lemgth arrived. 



dwell on the late scene with Valancourt, the 
more her resolution declined ; and she was 
obliged to recollect all the arguments which 
the count had made use of to strengthen it, 
and all the precepts which she had received 
from her deceased father on the subject of 



Emily went to it at least with coni|K>sure of 
manner ; but Valancourt was so much agi- 
tated, tliat he could not speak for several 
minutes, and his first words were alternately 
those of lamentation, entreaty, and self-re- 



se/f-conimn nd, to enable her to act with pru- proach. Afterwards he said, ' Emily, I haw 
Llence and dignity on this the mosl severe oc- \oN<i^ >jCi\3L— \ do love you better than my hfe ; 
casion of her life. There were moBaeixVa x<>^wv. \wx\ ^.m t>»5\fc^ \i^ vwj ^^^ww ^^s^^siuct, Ya 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPIIO. 8$ 

1 would seek to entangle you in a connexion heart, * Farewell, Emily, you will always be 
that must be miserable for you, rather than the only object of my tenderness. Sometimes 
subject myself to the punishment which is my you will think of the unhappy Valancourt, and 
due — the loss of you. I am a wretch, but I it will be with pity, though it may not be with 
will be a villain no longer. I will not en- esteem. O ! what is the whole world to me, 
deavour to shake your resolution by the plead- without your esteem 1' He checked himself — 
ings of a selfish passion. I resign you, Emily, ' I am falling again into the error I have just 
and will endeavour to find consolation in con- lamented : I must not intrude longer upon 
sidering that, though I am miserable, you, at your patience, or I shall relapse into despair.' 
least, may be happy. The merit of the sacri- He once more bade Emily adieu, pressed 
fice is, indeed, not my own, for I should never her hands to his lips, looked at her for the 
have attained strength of mind to surrender last time, and hurried out of the room, 
you, if your prudence had not demanded it.' Emily remained in the chair where he had 

He paused a moment, while Emily attempt- left her, oppressed with a pain at her heart 
ed to conceal the tears which came to her which scarcely permitted her to breathe, and 
eyes. She would have said, 'You speak now listening to his departing steps sinking fainter 
as you were wont to do ; ' but she checked her- and fainter as he crossed the hall. She was 
self. — ' Forgive me, Emily,' said he, 'all the at length roused by the voice of the countess 
sufferings I have occasioned you, and some- in the garden ; and her attention being then 
times, when you think of the wretched Valan- awakened, the first object which struck her 
court, remember that his only consolation sight was the vacant chair where Valancourt 
would be to believe, that you are no longer had sat. The tears which had been for some 
unhappy by his folly.' The tears now fell time repressed by the kind of astonishment 
fast upon her cheek, and he was relapsing that followed his departure, now came to her 
into the phrensy of despair, when Emily en- relief, and she was at length sufficiently com- 
deavoured to recall her fortitude, and to ter- posed to return to her own room, 
minate an interview which only seemed to 

increase the distress of both. Perceiving her _ 

tears, and that she was rising to go, Valan- 
court struggled once more to overcome his rHADTiTD vt t 
own feelings and to soothe hers. 'There- CHAi'lJi.K Al^i. 
membrance of this sorrow,' said he, ' shall in *ThIs is no mortal business, nor no' sound 
future be my protection. O ! never again That the earth owes ! . . . .' 
will example or temptation have power to Shakespeare. 
seduce me to evil, exalted as I shall be by the We now return to the mention of Montoni, 
recollection of your grief for me.' whose rage and disappointment were soon 

Emily was somewhat comforted by this lost in nearfer interests than any which the un- 
assurancc. ' We are now parting for ever,' happy Emily had awakened. His depreda- 
said she ; ' but, if my happiness is dear to tions having exceeded their usual limits, and 
you, you will always remember, that nothing reached an extent, at which neither the timi- 
can contribute to it more than to believe that dity of the then commercial senate of Venice, 
you have recovered your o^^'n esteem. ' Valan- nor their hope of his occasional assistance, 
court took her hand — his eyes were covered would permit them to connive, — the same 
with tears, and the farewell he would have effort, it was resolved, should complete the 
spoken was lost in sighs. After a few mo- suppression of his power and the correction 
ments Emily said with difficulty and emotion, of his outrages. While a corps of consider- 
' Farewell, Valancourt, may you be happy !' able strength was upon the point of receiving 
She repeated her farewell, and attempted to orders to march for Udolpho, a young officer, 
withdraw her hand ; but he still held it, and prompted partly by resentment for some injury 
bathed it with his tears. ' Why prolong these received from Montoni, and partly by the hope 
moments?' Emily said in a voice scarcely of distinction, solicited an interview with the 
audible ; 'they are too painful to us both.' minister who directed the enterprise. To him 
'This is too — too much!* exclaimed Valan- he represented that the situation of Udolpho 
court, resigning her hand and throwing him- rendered it too strong to be taken by open 
self into a chair, \\ here he covered his face force, except after some tedious operations ; 
with his hands, and was overcome for some that Montoni had lately shown how capable 
moments by convulsive sighs. After a long he was of adding to its strength all the advan- 
pause, during which Emily wept in silence, tages which could be derived from the skill of 
and Valancourt seemed struggling with his a commander ; that so considerable a body of 
grief, she again rose to take leave of him. troops as that allotted to the expedition could 
Then, endeavouring to recover his com- not approach Udolpho without his know- 
posiue, — ' I am again afflicting you,' said he, ledge ; and that it was not for the honoiu* of 
• but let the anguish I suffer plead for me.' the republic to have a large part of its regular 
He then added in a solemn voice, which fre- force employed, for such a time as the siege 
quently trembled with the agitation of his of Udolpho would require, upon the a.t.tafi3L<i^ 



^ 



THE MYSTMRIES OP UDOLPHO, 



a handful of banditti. The object of the ex- 
pedition, he thought, might be accomplished 
much more safely and speedily by mingling con- 
trivance with force. It was possible to meet 
Montoni and his party without their walls, 
and to attack them then ; or, by approaching 
the fortress with the secrecy consistent with 
the march of smaller bodies of troops, to take 
advantage either of the treachery or negli- 
gence of some of his party, and to rush un- 
expectedly upon the whole, even in the castle 
of Udolpho. 

This advice was seriously attended to, and 
the officer who gave it received the command 
of the troops demanded for his purpose. His 
first efforts were accordingly those of contriv- 
ance alone. In the neighbourhood of Udolpho 
he waited till he had secured the assistance of 
the condotiieri, of whom he found none that 
be addressed imwilling to punish their impe- 
rious master, and to secure their own pardon 
from the senate. He learned also the number 
of Montoni's troops, and that it had been 
much increased since his late successes. The 
conclusion of his plan was soon effected. 
Having returned with his party, who received 
the watchword and other assistance from their 
friends within, Montoni and his officers were 
surprised by one division, who had been di- 
rected to their apartment, while the other 
maintained the slight combat which preceded 
the surrender of the whole garrison. — Among 
the persons seized with Montoni, was Orsino, 
the assassin, who had joined him on his first 
arrival at Udolpho, and whose concealment 
bad been made known to the senate by Count 
Morano, after the unsuccessful attempt of the 
latter to carry off Emily. It was indeed partly 
for the purpose of capturing this man, by 
whom one of the senate had been murdered, 
that the expedition was undertaken; and 
its success was so acceptable to them, that 
Morano was instantly released, notwithstand- 
ing the political suspicions which Montoni, by 
his secret accusation, had excited against him. 
The celerity and ease w ith w hich this whole 
transaction was completed, prevented it from 
attracting ciu-iosity, or even from obtaining a 
place in any of the publislied records of that 
lime ; so that Emily, who remained in Lan- 
guedoc, was ignorant of the defeat and signal 
humiliation of her late persecutor. 

Her mind was now occupied with sufTorirgs 
which no effort of reason had yet been able to 
control. Coimt de Villefort, who had sin- 
cerely attempted whate\er benevolence could 
suggest for softening them, sometimes allowed 
her the solitude she wished for; sometimes 
led her into friendly parties, and constantly 
protected her as much as possible from the 
shrewd inquiries and critical con\-ersation of 
the countess. He often invited her to make 
ejccursJoos with him and his daughter, during 
wiiich he conversed en*. :/y c:^ ques\.\civ>> smi- 
abic (o her taste, wiui>*ui a; ^sj^ltvo^ vo ooti* 



suit it, and thus endeavotu^d gradually to 
withdraw her from the subject of her grief, and 
to awake other interests in her mind. Emily, 
to whom he appeared as the enlightened 
friend and protector of her youth, soon felt 
for him the tender affection of a datightor, 
and her heart expanded to her young friend 
Blanche as to a sister, whose kindness and sim- 
plicity compensated for the want of more 
brilliant qualities. It was long before she 
could sufficiently abstract her mind frMn 
Valancourt to listen to the story promised by 
old Dorothy, concerning which her curiosity 
had once been so deeply interested ; but 
Doroth^e at length reminded her of it, and 
Emily desired XhaX she would come that night 
to her chamber. 

Still her thoughts were emploj'ed by con- 
siderations which weakened her curiosity; 
and Dorothy's tap at the door, soon after 
twelve, surprised her as mucb as if it had not 
been appointed. ' I am come at last, lady,' 
said she ; ' I wonder what it is that makes my 
old limbs shake so to-night : I thought (»ce 
or twice I should have dropped as I was a- 
coming.' Emily seated her in a chair, and de- 
sired that she would compose her spirits before 
she entered upon the subject that had bfongfat 
her thither. ' Alas !' said Dorothde, • it iJ 
thinking of that. I believe, whidi has dis- 
turbed me so. In my way liither, too, I pas> 
sed the chamber where my dear lady died, 
and everything was so still and g^loomy about 
me, that I almost fancied I saw her as die 
appeared upon her death-bed.* 

Emily now drew her chair near to Dofotbde, 
who went on : 'It is about twenty 3rears since 
my lady marchioness came a bride to the dia- 
teau. O ! I well remember how she looked 
when she came into the great haU, where tre 
servants were all assemmed to welcome her, 
and how happy my lord the marquis seemed. 
Ah ! who would have thought then ? — But. as 
I was saying, ma'amselle, I thought the mar- 
chioness, with all her sweet looks, did not Vxk 
happy at heart ; and so I told my husband. 
and he said it M-as all fancy : so I said no 
more, but I made my remarks for all that 
My lady marchioness was then about your 
age, and, as I have often thought, ^-ery like 
you. Well ! my lord the marquis kept open 
house for a long time, and gave such enter- 
tainments, and there was such gav doings, as 
have never been in the chateau suace. 1 was 
younger, ma'amselle, then, than I am now. 
and was as gay as the best of theno. I re- 
member I danced with Philip the butler, in a 
pink go^Ti with yellow ribbons, and a edit 
not such as they wear now, but plaited h%h 
with ribbons all about it It was Toy be- 
coming truly : — my lord the marqois noticod 
me. Ah ! he was a good-natured gentleman 
then — ^who would have thought that he ' 

'But the marchioness, jDoroth^,' said 
"Eaoi^^j \ * ^^>a^ ^^ VftUing me of her.' 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 9Z 

' O ^es, my lady marchioness ; — I thought year, my lady was taken ill, and I thought her 

he did not seem happy at heart ; and once, long fretting had made her so — ^but, alas ! I 

oon after \he marriage, I caught her crying fear it was worse than that. ' 
1 her chamber ; but when she saw me she * Worse, Dorothy !' said Emily : ' can that 

ried her eyes, and pretended to smile. I did be possible ?' 

ot dare then to ask what was the matter ; ' I fear it was so, madam ; there were strange 

ut the next time I saw her crying, I did, and appearances. But I will only tell what hap- 

lie seemed displeased — so- 1 said no more. I pened. My lord the marquis ' 

jund out, some time after, how it was. Her ' Hush, Dorothfee, what sounds were those ?' 

ither, it seems, had commanded her to marry said Emily. 

ly lord the marquis for his money, and there Dorothle changed countenance ; and while 

•as another nobleman, or else a chevalier, theyboth listened, theyheard on the stillness of 

lat she liked better, and that was very fond the night, music of uncommon sweetness. 

f her ; and she fretted for the loss of him, I ' I have surely heard that voice before I' 

incy ; but she never told me so. My lady said Emily at length. 

[ways tried to conceal her tears from the ' I have often heard it, and at this same 

larquis; for I have often seen her, after she hour,' said Dorothy solemnly ; and if spirits 

as been so sorrowful, look so calm and sweet ever bring music — that is siu^ely the music of 

hen he came into the room ! But my lord, one !' 

1 of a sudden, grew gloomy and fretful, Emily, as the sounds drew nearer, knew 
id very unkind sometimes to my lady, them to be the same she had formerly heard 
his afflicted her very much, as I saw, for at the time of her father's death ; and whether 
le never complained ; and she used to try so it was the remembrance they now revived of 
<reetly to oblige him, and to bring him into that melancholy event, or that she was struck 
good humour, that my heart has often ached with superstitious awe, it is certain she was so 

• see it. But he used to be stubborn, and much affected that she had nearly fainted. 

ve her harsh answers ; and then, when she ' I think I once told you, madam,' said 

imd it all in vain, she would go to her own Doroth^e, ' that I first heard this music soon 

»om, and cry so ! — I used to hear her in the after my lady's death : I well remember the 

ite-room, poor dear lady ! but I seldom ven- night !' 

red to go to her. I used sometimes to think ' Hark ! it comes again I* "said Emily ; ' let 

y lord was jealous. To be sure, my lady us open the window, and listen.' 
as greatly admired, but she was too good to They did so ; but soon the soimds floated 

jserve suspicion. Among the many cheva- gradually away into distance, and all was again 

!rs that visited at the chateau, there was one still : they seemed to have sunk among the 

at I always thought seemed just suited for woods, whose tufted tops were visible upon 

ylady ; he was so courteous, yet so spirited; the clear horizon, while every other feature 

id there was such a grace, as it were, in all of the scene was involved in the night shade, 

J did or said. I always observed that when- which, however, allowed the eye an indistinct 

er he had been there, the marquis was more view of some objects in the garden below, 
oomy and my lady more thoughtful ; and it As Emily leaned on the window, gazing 

me into my head that this was the cheva- with a kind of thrilling awe upon the obscu- 

r she ought to have married, but I never rity beneath, and then upon the cloudless arch 

uld learn for certain. ' above, enlightened only by the stars, Dorothy, 

• What was the chevalier's name, Doro- in a low voice, resumed her narrative. 

te ?' said Emily. • I was saying, ma'amselle, that I well 

' Why that I will not tell even to you, remember when first I heard that music. It 

I'amselle, for evil may come of it. I once was one night, soon after my lady's death, 

ard from a person, who is since dead, that that I had sat up later than usual ; and I don't 

2 marchioness was not in law the wife of the know how it was, but I had been thinking a 
irquis, for that she had before been privately great deal about my poor mistress, and of the 
irried to the gentleman she was so much sad scene I had lately witnessed. The chateau 
;ached to, and was afterwards afraid to was quite still, and I was in a chamber at a 
rn it to her father, who was a very stern good distance from the rest of the servants, 
m ; but this seems very unlikely, and I never and this, with the mournful things I had been 
ve much faith to it. As I was saying, the thinking of, I suppose, made me low-spirited, 
irquis was most out of humour, as I thought, fori felt very lonely and forlorn, as it were, 
len the chevalier I spoke of had been at the and listened often, wishing to hear a sound in 
ateau, and at last his ill treatment of my the chateau ; for you know, ma'amselle, when 
ly made her quite miserable. He would one can hear people moving, one does not 
J hardly any visitors at the castle, and made so much mind about one's fears. But all the 
r live almost by herself. I was her constant servants were gone to bed, and I sat thinking 
endant, and saw all she suffered ; but still and thinking, till I was almost afraid to look 

3 never complained. round the room, and my poor lady's couti.- 

' After matters had gone on thus for near a tenance ofteu catcv^ \.c> tec^j -wscdA^ ^>^^5sv -^aX 



^ 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



had seen her when she was dying ; and once 
or twice I almost thought I saw her before me 
— ^when suddenly 1 heard such sweet music ! 
it seemed just at ray window, and I shall 
never forget what I felt. I had not power to 
move from my chair : but then, when I thought 
it was my dear lady's voice, the tears came to 
my eyes. I had often heard her sing in her 
life-time, and to be sure she had a very fine 
voice ; it had made rae cry to hear her, many 
a time, when she has sat in her oriel of an even- 
ing playing upon her lute such sad songs, and 
singing so — O ! it went to one's heart ! I have 
listen^ in the ante-chamber for the hour 
together ; and she would sometimes sit play- 
ing, with the window open, when it was simi- 
mer time, till it was quite dark ; and when I 
have gone in to shut it, she has hardly seemed 
to know what hour it was. But, as I said, 
madam,' continued Dorothee, ' when first I 
heard the music that came just now, I thought 
it was my late lady's, and I have often thought 
so again when I have heard it, as I have done at 
intervals ever since. Sometimes many months 
have gone by, but still it has retiuned.' 

' It is extraordinary,' observed Emily, ' that 
no person has yet discovered the musician. ' 

' Aye, ma'amselle, if it had been anything 
earthly it would have been discovered long 
ago, but who could have courage to follow a 
spirit? and if they had, what good could it 
do ? — for spirits, you know, ma'am, can take 
any shape, or no shape ; and they will be here 
one minute, and the next, perhaps, in a quite 
different place !' 

* Pray resume your story of the marchioness,' 
said Emily, ' and acquaint me with the manner 
of her death. ' 

' I will, ma'am,' said Dorothee ; 'but shall 
we leave the window?' 

' This cool air refreshes me,' replied Emily : 
' and I love to hear it creep along the woods, 
and to look upon this dusky landscape. You 
were speaking of my lord the marquis, when 
the music interrupted us. ' 

' Yes, madam, my lord the marquis became 
more and more gloomy ; and my lady grew 
worse and worse, till one night she was taken 
very ill indeed. I was called up, and when I 
came to her bed-side I was shocked to see 
her countenance — it was so changed ! She 
looked piteously up at me, and desired I would 
call the marquis again, for he was not yet 
come, and tell him she had something par- 
ticular to say to him. At last he came ; and 
he did, to be sure, seem very sorry to see her, 
but he said very little. My lady told him she 
felt herself to be dying, and wished to speaic 
with him alone ; and then I left the room, but 
I shall never forget his look as I went. 

' When I returned, I ventured to remind my 
lord about sending for a doctor, for I sup- 
posed he had forgot to do so in his grief ; but 
my lady said it was then loo laie -. but my 
lord, so fax from thinking so, sewx^dxo vYivxj^K. 



hghtly of her disorder — till she was seized 
with such terrible pains! O, I never shall 
forget her shriek ! My lord then sent off a 
man and horse for a doctor, and walked about 
the room and all over the ^chateau in the 
greatest distress ; and I staid by my dear 
lady, and did what I could to ease her suf- 
ferings. She hacl intervals of ease, and in 
one of these she sent for my lord again ; when 
he came I was going, but she desired I would 
not leave her. O ! I shall never forget what 
a scene passed — I can hardly bear to think 
of it now? My lord was almost distracted, 
for my lady behaved with so much goodness, 
and took such pains to comfort him, that if 
he ever had suffered a suspicion to enter his 
head, he must now have been convinced he 
was wrong. And to be sure he did seem to 
be overwhehned with the thought of his treat- 
ment of her, and this affected her so much 
that she fainted away. 

' We then got my lord out of the room ; he 
went into his library, and threw himself on 
the floor, and there he stayed, and would hear 
no reason that was talked to him. When my 
lady recovered, she inquired for him ; but 
afterwards said she qould not bear to see his 
grief, and desired we would let her die quietly. 
She died in my arms, ma'amselle, and she 
went off as peacefully as a child, for all the 
violence of her disorder was passed. ' 

Dorothee paused and wept, and Emily wept 
with her ; for she was much affected by the 
goodness of the late marchioness, and by the 
meek patience with which she had suffered. 

'When the doctor came,' resumed Dorothee. 
— 'alas! he came too late — ^he appeared 
greatly shocked to see her, for soon after her 
death a frightful blackness spread all over her 
face. When he had sent the attendants oM 
of the room, he asked me several odd questions 
about the marchioness, particularly concenj* 
ing the manner in which she had been seized: 
and he often shook his head at my answers, 
and seemed to mean more than he chose to 
say. But I understood him too well. How- 
ever, I kept my remarks to myself, and oriy 
told them to my husband, who bade me hoM 
my tongue. Some of the other servants, how- 
ever, syspected what I did, and strange, 
reports were whispered about the neighbour- • 
hood, but no body dared to make any stir 
about them. When my lord heard that my! 
lady was dead, he shut himself up, and would 
see nobody but the doctor, who used to bcr 
with him alone sometimes for an hour to-j 
gether : and after that the doctor never talked' 
with me again about my lady. When she 
was buried in the church of the convent, att 
little distance yonder (if the moon was up yd 
might see the towers here, ma'amselle), allnfj 
lord's vassals followed the funeral, and the 
was not a dry eye among them, for she 
done a deal of good amcnj the poor. M^ 
Vx^ xVvR marquis, I never saw anybody s<| 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 93 

melancholy as he was afterwards, and some- felt a thrilling curiosity to see the chamber in ^ 

times he would be in such fits of violence, which the marchioness had died, and which 

that we almost thought he had lost hi& senses. Dorothee had said remained, with the bed 

He did not stay long at the chateau, but joined and furniture, just as when the corpse was 

his regiment ; and soon after, all the servants, removed for interment. The solemn emotions 

except my husband and I, received notice to which the expectation of viewing such a scene 

go, for my lord went to the wars. I never had awakened, were in unison with the pre- 

saw him after ; for he would not return to sent tone of her mind, depressed by severe 

the chateau, though it is such a fine place ; disappointment. Cheerful objects rather 

and never finished those fine rooms he was added to, than removed this depression ; but 

building on the west side of it ; and it has, in perhaps she yielded too much to her melan- 

a manner, been shut up ever since, till my lord choly inclination, and imprudently lamented 

the count came here.' the misfortune, which no virtue of her own 

' The death of the marchioness appears ex- could have taught her to avoid, though no 

traordinary,' said Emily, who was anxious to effort of reason could make her look unmoved 

know more than she dared to speak. upon the self-degradation of him whom she 

' Yes, madam,' replied Dorothee, ' it was had once esteemed and loved, 
extraordinary : I have told you all I saw, and Dorothee promised to return on the follow- 

you may easily guess what I think. I cannot ing night with the keys of the chambers ; and 

say more, because I would not spread reports then wished Emily good repose, and departed, 

that might offend my lord the count. Emily, however, continued at the window, 

' You are very right,' said Emily ; — ' where musing upon the melancholy fate of the mar- 
did the marquis die ?' — ' In the North of chioness, and listening, in awful expectation, 
France, I believe, ma'amselle,' replied Doro- for a retmn of the music. But the stillness 
thee. ' I was very glad when I heard my of the night remained long unbroken, except 
lord the count was coming, for this had been by the murmuring sounds of the woods, as 
a sad desolate place these many years, and we they waved in the breeze, and then by the 
heard such strange noises after my lady's distant bell of the convent, striking one. She 
death, that, as I told you before, my husband now withdrew from the window ; and as she 
and I left it for a neighbouring cottage. And sat at her bedside, indulging melancholy 
now, lady, I have told you all this sad history, reveries, which the loneliness of the hour as- 
and all my thoughts, and you have promised, sisted, the stillness was suddenly interrupted, 
you know, never to give the least hint about not by music, but by very uncommon sounds, 
it.' — 'I have,' said Emily: 'and I will be that seemed to come either from the room ad- 
faithful to my promise, Dorothee ; — what you joining her own, or from one below. The 
have told me has interested me more tnan terrible catastrophe that had been related to 
you can imagine. I only wish I could pre- her, together with the mysterious circum- 
vail upon you to tell me the name of the cheva- stances said to have since occurred in the 
lier whom you thought so deserving of the chateau, had so much shocked her spirits, 
marchioness.' that she now sunk for a moment under the 

Dorothee, however, steadily refused to do weakness of superstition. The sounds, how- 

this, and then returned to the notice of Emily's ever, did not return ; and she retired, to 

likeness to the late marchioness. ' There is forget in sleep the disastrous story she had 

another picture of her,' added she, 'hanging heard, 
in a room of the suite which was shut up. It 

was drawn, as I have heard, before she was •— ^ 

married, and is much more like you than 
the miniature.' When Emily expressed a 

strong desire to see this, Dorothee replied, CHAPTER XLII. 

that she did not wish to open those rooms ; * Now is the time of night 

but Emily reminded her, that the count had That, the graves all gaping wide, 

talked the other day of ordering them to be Every one lets forth his spright, ^ 

opened, of which Dorothee seemed to •onsider 1° ^« church-way path to glide, 

much ; and then she owned that she should bHAKESPEARE. 

feel less, if she went into them with Emily On the next night, about the same hour as 

first, than otherwise ; and at length promised before, Dorothee came to Emily's chamber 

to show the picture. with the keys of that suite of rooms which 

The night was too far advanced, and Emily had been particularly appropriated to the late 

was too much affected by the narrative of the marchioness. These extended along the north 

scenes which had passed in those apartments, side of the chateau, forming part of the old 

to desire to visit them at this hour ; but she building ; and as Emily's room was in the 

requested that Dorothee would return on the south, they had to pass over a great extent 

following night, when they were not likely to of the castle, and by the chambers of several 

be observed, and conduct her thither. Be- of the family, whose observation Dorothee 

sides her wish to examine the portrait, she was anxious to avoids since vt,^^\.^'xa^^*'*«^- 



94 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



quiry and raise reports, such as would dis- 
please the count. She therefore requested 
that Emily would wait half an hour before 
they ventured forth, that they might be cer- 
tain all the servants were gone to bed. It 
was nearly one before the chateau was per- 
fectly still, or Dorothee thought it prudent to 
leave the chamber. In this interval, her 
spirits seemed to be greatly affected by the 
remembrance of past events, and by the pros- 
pect of entering again upon places where 
these had occurred, and in which she had not 
been for so many years. Emily too was 
affected ; but her feelings had more of solem- 
nity, and less of fear. From the silence into 
winch reflection and expectation had thrown 
them, they at length roused themselves, and 
left the coamber. Dorothee at first carried 
the lamp, but her hand trembled so much 
with infirmity and alarm, that Emily took it 
from her, and offered her arm to support her 
feeble steps. 

They had to descend the great staircase, 
and, after passing over a wide extent of the 
chateau, to ascend another, which led to the 
suite of rooms they were in quest of. They 
stepped cautiously along the Open corridor 
that ran round the great hdl, and into which 
the chambers of the count, countess, and the 
Lady Blanche, opened; and from thence, 
descending the chief staircase, they crossed the 
hall itself. Proceeding through the servants' 
hall, where the dying embei^ of a wood fire 
still glimmered on the hearth, and the supper- 
table was siuTOtmded by chairs that ob- 
structed their passage, they came to the foot 
of the back staircase. Old Dorothee here 
paused, and looked around : ' Let us listen.' 
said she, ' if anything is stirring ; ma'amselle, 
do you hear any voice ?* ' None,' said Emily, 
' there certainly is no person up in the 
chateau, besides oiu-selves.' — ' No, ma'am- 
selle,' said Dorothee, 'but I have never been 
here at this hoiu- before, and, after what I 
know, my fears are not wonderful.' — 'What 
do you know?' said Emily. — 'O ma'amselle, 
we have no time for talking now ; let us go on. 
That door on the left is the one we must open, ' 

They proceeded ; and having reached the 
top of the staircase, Dorothee applied the key 
to the lock. *Ah,' said she, as she endea- 
voured to turn it, ' so many years have passed 
since this was opened, that I fear it will not 
move.' Emily was more successful, and they 
presently entered a spacious and ancient 
chamber. 

' Alas !' exclaimed Dorothee, as she entered, 
' the last time I passed through this door — I 
followed my poor lady's corpse I' 

Emilv, struck by the circumstance, and 

affected by the dusky and solemn air of the 

apartment, remained silent ; and they passed 

oa through a long suite of rooms, till they 

came to one more sjDacious than l\\e rcsl, ?itid 

rfcb in the remains of faded magm&ceTicc. 



' Let us rest here awhile, madam,' said 
Dorothee faintly, 'we are going into the 
chamber where my lady died ! that door opens 
into it. Ah, ma'amselle ! why did you per- 
suade me to come ?' 

Emily drew one of the massy arm-chairs 
with which the apartment was furnished, and 
begged Dorothee would sit down, and try to 
compose her spirits^ 

' How the sight of this place brings all that 
passed formerly to my mind !' said Dorothee ; 
' it seems as if it was but yesterday since all 
that sad affair happened !' 

' Hark ! what noise is that?* said Emily. 

Dorothee, half starting from her chair, 
looked round the apartment, and they listened ; 
but, everything remaining still, the old woman 
spoke again upon the subject of her sorrow : 
'This saloon, ma'amselle, was in my lady's 
time the finest apartment in the chateau, and 
it was fitted up according to her own taste. 
All this grand furniture, — but you can now 
hardly see what it was for the dust, and oiu* 
light is none of the best — ah 1 how I have 
seen this room lighted up in my lady's time ! 
all this grand furniture came from Paris, and 
was made after the fashion of some in the 
Louvre there, except those large glasses, and 
they came from some outlandish place, and 
that rich tapestry. How the colours are 
faded already !— since I saw it last !' 

' I understood that was twenty years ago,' 
ob^rved Emily. 

'Thereabout, madam,' said Dorothee, ' and 
well remembered ; but all the time between 
then and now seems as nothing. That tapes- 
try used to be greatly admired at : it tells the 
stories out of some famous book or other, but 
I have forgot the name.' 

Emily now rose to examine the figures it 
exhibited, and discovered by verses in the 
Proven9al tongue, wrought underneath each 
scene, that it exhibited stories from some of 
the most celebrated ancient romances. 

Dorothee's spirits being now more com- 
posed, she rose, and unlocked the door that 
led into the late marchioness's apartment, and 
Emily passed into a lofty chamber hung round 
with dark arras, and so spacious, that the 
lamp she held up did not show its extent ; 
while Dorothee, when she entered, had 
dropped into a chair, where sighing deeply, 
she scarcely trusted herself with the view erf 
a scene so affecting to her. It was some tim« 
before Emily perceived through the dusk the 
bed on which the marchioness was said to 
have died : when, advancing to the upper end 
of the room, she discovered the high canopied 
tester of dark green damask, with the curtains 
descending to the floor in the fashion of a 
tent, half drawn, and remaining apparently 
as they had been left twenty years before ; 
and over the whole bedding was throwTi a 
eouTvlcrpane, or pall, of black velvet, that 
\i>3j!i^ ^Q^u vo \2ck& floor, Emily shuddered as 



THE MVSTEIi/ES OF ODOLPMO. 



^% 



she held the lamp over it, and looked within 
the dark curtains, where she almost expected 
td have seen a human face ; and, suddenly 
remembering the horror she had-suffered upon 
discovering the dying Madame Montoni in 
the turret chamber of Udolpho, her spirits 
fainted ; and she was turning from the bed, 
when Dorothee, who had now reached it, ex- 
claimed, ' Holy Virgin ! methinks I see my 
lady stretched upon that pall — as when last I 
saw her !' 

Emily, shocked by this exclamation, looked 
involuntarily again within the curtains, but 
the blackness of the pall only appeared ; while 
Dorothee was compelled to support herself 
upon the side of the bed, and presently tears 
brought her some relief. 

' Ah !' said she, after she had wept awhile, 
• it was here I sat on that terrible night, and 
held my lady's hand, and heard her last words, 
and saw all her sufferings — here she died in 
my arms I' 

• Do not indulge these painful recollections,* 
said Emily ; ' let us go. Show me the picture 
you mentioned, if it will not too much affect 
you.' 

' It hangs in the oriel,' rising and going to- 
wards a small door near the bed's head, 
which she opened ; and Emily followed with 
the light into the closet of the late marchio- 
ness. 

• Alas ! there she is, ma'amselle,' said Doro- 
thee, pointing to the portrait of a lady ; • there 
is her very self ! just as she looked when she 
came first to the chateau. You see, madam, 
she was all-blooming like you, then — ^and so 
soon to be cut oft !' 

While Dorothee spoke, Emily was atten- 
tively examining the picture, which bore a 
strong resemblance to the miniature, though 
the expression of the countenance in each was 
somewhat different ; but still she thought 
she perceived something of that pensive 
melancholy in the portrait, which so strongly 
characterised the miniature. 

' Pray, ma'amselle, stand beside the picture, 
that I may look at you together,' said Doro- 
thee ; who, when the request was complied 
with, exclaimed again at the resemblance. 
Emily also, as she gazed upon it, thought that 
she had somewhere seen a person very like it, 
though she could not now recollect who this 
was. 

In this closet were many memorials of the 
departed marchioness ; a robe and several 
articles o/ her dress were scattered upon the 
chairs, as if they had just been thrown off. 
On the floor were a pair of black satin slip- 
pers ; and on the dressing-table a pair of 
gloves, and a long black veil, which, as Emily 
took it up to examine, she perceived was drop- 
ping to pieces with age, 

' Ah ! said Dorothde, observing the veil, 
' my lady's hand laid it there ; it has never 
been moved since V 



Emily, shuddering, immediately laid it down 
again. ' I well remember seeing her take it off, ' 
continued Dorothee ; it was on the night before 
her death, when she had returned from a 
little walk I had persuaded her to take in 
the gardens, and she seemed refreshed by it. 
I told her how much better she looked, and I 
remember what a languid smile she gave me ; 
but, alas ! she little thought, or I either, that 
she was to die that night.' 

Dorothee wept again, and then, taking up 
the veil, threw it suddenly over Emily, who 
shuddered to find it wrapped round her, de- 
scending even to her feet ; and as she endea- 
voured to throw it off, Dorothee entreated 
that she would keep it on for one moment. 
' I thought,' added she, ' how like you would 
look to my dear mistress, in that veil ; — may 
your life, ma'amselle, be a happier one tlian 
hers I' 

Emily, having disengaged herself from the 
veil, laid it again on the dressing-table, and 
surveyed the closet, where every object on 
which her eye fixed seemed to speak of the 
marchioness. In a large oriel window of 
painted glass stood a table with a silver cruci- 
fix, and a prayer-book open ; and Emily re- 
membered with emotion what Dorothee had 
mentioned concerning her custom of playing 
on her lute in this window, before she observed 
the lute itself lying on a corner of the table, 
as if it had been carelessly placed there by the 
hand that, had so often awakened it 

' This is a sad, forlorn place !' said Doro- 
thee J ' for when my dear lady died, I had no 
heart to put it to rights, or the chamber 
either ; and my lord never came into the 
rooms after ; so they remain just as they did 
when my lady was removed for interment.' 

While Dorothee spoke, Emily was still 
looking on the lute, which was a Spanish one, 
and remarkably large ; and then, with a hesi- 
tating hand, she took it up and passed her 
fingers over the chords. "They were out of 
tune, but uttered a deep and full sound. 
Dorothde started at their well-known tones, 
and seeing the lute in Emily's hand, said, 
• This is the lute my lady marchioness loved 
so ! I remember when last she played upon 
it — it was on the night that she died. I came 
as usual to undress her ; and, as I entered 
the bed-chamber, I heard the sound of music 
from the oriel, and perceiving it was my lady's, 
who was sitting there, I stepped softly to the 
door, which stood a little open, to listen ; for 
the music — though it was mournful — was so 
sweet I There I saw her, with the lute in her 
hand, looking upwards ; and the tears fell 
upon her cheeks, while ■ she sung a vesper 
hymn, so soft, and so solemn ! and her voice 
trembled, as it were : and then she would stop 
for a moment, and wipe away her tears, and 
go on again, lower than before. O ! I had 
often listened to my lady, but never heard any 
thing so sweet as this ; it made me cr^ akoA.^^ 



9^ THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

to hear it. She had been at prayers, I fancy, the pall was more violently agitated than before; 
for there was the book open on the table be- but Emily, somewhat ashamed of her terrors, 
side her — aye, and there it lies open still ! stepped back to the bed, willing to be con- 
Pray let us leave the oriel, ma'amselle,' added vinced that the wind- only had occasioned her 
Dorothea, 'this is a heart-breaking place.' alarm; when, as she gazed within the cur- 
Having returned into the chamber, she de- tains, the pall moved again, and in the next 
sired to look once more upon the bed ; when, moment the apparition of a human countcn- 
as they came opposite to the open door lead- ance rose above it. 

ing to the saloon, Emily, in the partial gleam Screaming with terror, they both tied, and 
which the lamp threw into it, thought she saw got out of the chamber as fast as their trem- 
something glide along into the obscurer part bling limbs would bear them, leaving open 
of the room. Her spirits had been much af- the doors of all the rooms through which they 
fected by the surrounding scene, or it is pro- passed. When they reached the staircase, 
bable this circiunstance, whether real or ima- Dorothee threw open a chamber-door, where 
ginary, would not have affected her in the some of the female servants slept, and sunk 
degree it did ; but she endeavoured to conceal breathless on the bed ; while Enuly, deprived 
her emotion from Dorothee, who, however, of all presence of mind, made only a feeUe 
observing her countenance change, inquired if attempt to conceal the occasion of her terror 
she was ill. from the astonished servants : and though 
' Let us go,' said Emily faintly ; ' the air of Dorothee, when she could speak, endeavoured 
these rooms is unwholesome :' but when she to laugh at her own fright, and was joined by 
attempted to do so, considering that she must Emily, no remonstrances could prevail with 
pass through the apartment where the phan- the servants, who had quickly taken the 
torn of her terror had appeared, this terror alarm, to pass even the remainder of the night 
increased ; and, too faint to support herself, in a room near to these terrific chambers, 
she sat down on the side of the bed. Dorothee having accompanied Emily to her 
Dorothee, believing that she was only af- own apartment, they then began to talk over, 
fected by a consideration of the melancholy with some degree of coolness, the strange cir- 
catastrophe which had happened on this spot, cumstance that had just occurred : and Emily 
endeavoured to cheer her ; and then, as they would almost have doubted her own percep- 
sat together on the bed, she began to relate tions, had not those of Dorothee attested thar 
other particulars concerning it, and this truth. Having now mentioned what she had 
without reflecting that it might increase Emily's observed in the outer chamber, she asked the 
emotion, but because they were particularly housekeeper whether die was certain no door 
interesting to herself. ' A little before my had been left unfastened, by which a person 
lady's death,' said she, 'when the pains were might secretly have entered the apartments? 
gone off, she called me to her ; and stretching Dorothee replied that she had constantly kept 
out her hand to me, I sat down just there — the keys of the several doors in her own pos- 
where the curtain falls upon the bed. How session ; that when she had gone her rounds 
well I remember her look at the time — death through the castle, as she frequently did, to 
was in it ! — I can almost fancy I see her now. examine if all was safe, she had tried these 
There she lay, ma'amselle — her face was upon doors among the rest, and had always found 
the pillow there ! This black counterpane them fastened. It was therefore impossible, 
was not upon the bed then ; it was laid on she added, that any person could have got ad- 
after her death, and she was laid out upon mittance into the apartments ; and if they 
it' could — it was very improbable they should 
Emily turned to look within the dusky cur- have chosen to sleep in a place so cold and 
tains, as if she could have seen the countc- forlorn. 

nance of which Dorothee spoke. The edge of Emily observed, that their visit to these 

the white pillow only appeared above the chambers had perhaps been watched, and that 

blackness of the pall ; but, as her eyes wan- some person, for a frolic, had followed them 

dered over the pall itself, she fancied she saw into the rooms with a design to frighten them; 

it move. Without speaking, she caught Do- and while they were in the oriel, had taken the 

rothee's arm, who, surprised by the action, opportunity of concealing himsldf in the bed. 

and by the look of terror which accompanied Dorothee allowed that this was possible, till 

it, turned her eyes from Emily to the bed, she recollected that, on entering the aport- 

whcre, in the next moment, slie too saw the ment, she had turned the key of the outer 

ixill slowly lifted and fall again. door ; and this, which had been done to pre- 

Emily attempted to go, but Dorothee stood vent their visit being noticed by any of the 

fixed, and gazed upon the bed ; and at length family who might happen to be up, must effec- 

said — 'It is only the wind that waves it, tually have exduded every person except them- 

ma'amselle ! we have left all the doors open ; selves, from the chambers ; and she now per- 

see how the air waves the lamp too— it is only sisted in affirming that the ghastly countenance 

the wind. ' she had seen was nothing human, but some 
•She had scarcely uttered these words, >N\vew ^ic^^l>A ^v'^fKc\>iQv\. 



THE MYSTERIES OF U DO LP HO. 97 

Emily was very solemnly affected. Of CIIAPnCR XLIII. 

whatever nature might be the appearance she « Hail, mildly-pleasing Solitude I 

had witnessed, whether human or super- Companion of the wise and good I 

natural, the fate of the deceased marchioness •„,:•. W. •:*»:; * 

was a truth not to be doubted; and this Thme is the balmy breath of morn, 

unaccountable circumstance, occurring in Just as the dew-bent rose « bora, 

the very scene of her sufferings, affected But chief when evening scenes decay, 

Emily's imagination with a superstitious awe, And the faint landscape swims away, 

to which, after having detected the fallacies Thine is the doubtful soft decline, 

at Udolpho, she might not have yielded, had And that best hour of musing thine.* 

she been ignorant of the unhappy story re- Thomson 

lated -by the housekeeper. Her she now Emily's injunctions to Annette to be silent on 
solemnly conjured to conceal the occurrence the subject of her terror were ineffectual ; and 
of this night, and to make light of the terror the occurrence of the preceding night spread 
she had already betrayed, that the count such alarm among the servants, who now 
might not be distressed by reports, which all affirmed that they had frequently heard 
would certainly spread alarm and confusion unaccountable noises in the chateau, that a 
among his family. 'Time,' she added, 'niay report soon reached the count, of the north side 
explain this mysterious affair ; meanwhile, of the castle being haunted. He treated this, 
let us watch the event with silence.' at first, with ridicule ; but perceiving that it was 

Doroth^e readily acquiesced : but she now productive of serious evil, in the confusion it 
recollected that she had left all the doors of occasioned among his household, he forbade 
the north suite of rooms open ; and, not any person to repeat it, on pain of punishment, 
having courage to return alone to lock The arrivaJ of a party of his friends soon 
even the outer one, Emily, after some effort, withdrew his thoughts entirely from this sub- 
so far conquered her own fears, that she ject ; and his servants had now little leisure 
offered to accompany her to the foot of the to brood over it, except indeed in the even- 
back staircase, and to wait there while ings after supper, when they all assembled in 
Dorothee ascended ; whose resolution being their hail, and related stories of ghosts till 
re-assured by this circumstance, she con- they feared to look round the room ; started 
sented to go ; and they left Emily's apart- if the echo of a closing door murmured along 
ment toge^er. the passage, and refused to go singly to any 

No sound disturbed the stillness as they part of the castle, 
passed along the halls and galleries ; but on On these occasions Annette made a dis- 
reaching the foot of the back staircase, tinguished figure. When she told not only 
Dorothee's resolution failed again. Having, of ail the wonders she had witnessed, but of 
however, paused a moment to Usten, and no all that she had imagined, in the castle of 
sound being heard above, she ascended, Udolpho, with the story of the strange dls- 
leaving Emily below ; and scarcely suffering appearance of Signora Laurentini, she made 
her eye to glance within the first chamber, no trifling impression on the mind of her 
she fastened the door which shut up the whole attentive auditors. Her suspicions concern- 
suite of apartments, and returned to Emily, ing Montoni, "She would also have freely dis- 
As they stepped along the passage leading closed, had not Ludovico, who was now in the 
into the great hall, a sound of lamentation service of the count, prudently checked her 
was heard, which seemed to come from the loquacity, whenever it pointed to that subject, 
hall itself, and they stopped in* new alarm to Among the visitors at the chateau was the 
listen ; when Emily presently distinguished Baron de Saint Foix, an old friend of the 
the voice of Annette, whom she found cross- count, and his son, the Chevalier St. Foix, 
"ing the hall, with another female servant, and a sensible and amiable young man ;. who, 
so terrified by the report which the other having in the preceding year seen the Lady 
maids had spread, that, believing she could be Blanche at Paris, had become her declared 
safe only where her lady was, she was going admirer. The friendship which the count 
for refuge to her apartment. Emily's en^ had long entertained for his father, and the 
deavours to laugh, or to argue her out of equality of their circumstances, made him 
these terrors, were equally vain ; and, in com- secretly approve of the connection ; but think- 
passion for her distress, she consented that she ing his daughter at this time too young to 
should remain in her room during the night, fix her choice for life, and wishing to prove 

the sincerity and strength of the chevalier's 
attachment, he then rejected his suit, though 
without forbidding his future hope. This 
young man now came, with the baron his 
— • father, to claim the reward of a steady affec- 

tion, a claim which the count admitted, and 
wliich Blanche did not reject. 
WJiile these visvtjcii«»N««^ -ax^^^ Ocft^5^»a-^*^ 



98 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

became a scene of gaiety and splendour, tures of the scene that remained visible ; 

The pavilion in the woods was fitted up, and when, as she gazed alternately on these, and 

frequented in the fine evenings as a supper- on the mild blue of the heavens, where tie 

room, when the hour usually concluded with first pale star of evening appeared, she per- 

a concert, at which the count and coimtess, sonified the hour in the following lines : — 
who were scientific performers, and the che- SONG OF THE E^^NING HOUR, 

valiers Henri ^d St F^. wi^ the I^dy Last of the Hours that track the fading Day, 

Blanche and Enuly. wjose voices and fine i move along the realms of twilight ai? ^' 

taste compensated for the want c« more skil- And hear, remote, the cHoral song decay 

ful executi(m, usually assisted. Several of Of sister nymphs, who dance aixiund his car. 

the count's servants performed on horns and .Then, as I follow through the aeure void, 

other instruments, some of which, placed at a His partial splendour from my straining eye 

httie distance among the woods, spoke in Sinks in the depth of space ; my only guide 

sweet response to the harmony that proceeded ^^ ^*^* ^y dawning on the furthest sky ; 

from the pavilion. Sov« that sweet lin^«ing strain of gayer Hours, 

At any other period these parties would Whose ck)se my voice prok)Bgs in dying notes, 

have been deHghtfiil to Emily ; but her spirits r^* "*°"'*^ ''''^^ ^^^ *^'? ^^2 ^ powers, 

**«Tt i.#^^m v««uBi<utu w *-•**« jr , w«i. »^^ ^^i««^ ^ downward on the evening gale it floats. 

were now oppressed wHh a melancholy which -.„ , , , , l , . . 

she perceived that no kind of what te called J^.^Zt^^JZ^ir^is'^ ^'**°' 

amusem«it had powa: to dissipate, and And mountain summits catch the purple gleam, 

whjch the tender and frequently pathetic And slumbering ocean faint and fainter glows ; 

melody of these concerts sometimes increased silent upon the globe's broad diade I steal, 

to a very painful degree. And o'er its dry turf shed the cooUng dews. 

She was particularly fond of walking the And every fever'd herb and floweret heal, 

woods that hung on a promontory overlooking And ail their firagrance on the air diffuse, 

the sea. Their luxuriant shade was soothing Where'er I move a tranquil pleasure reigns ; 

to her pensive mind ; and in the partied views O'er all the scene the dusky tints I send, 

which they afforded of the Mediterranean, That forests wild and mountains, stretching pWiw, 

with its winding shores and passing sails, And peopled towns, m soft confusion blend, 

tranquil beauty was united with grandeur. Widco'erthe world I waft the freshwiing wind. 

The paths were rude, and frequentiy over- l^Z^^^^ti^^f^^.^'^^^'^^^P^''^ 

..« A^ii ' I. *. H. • / i r 1 >•** whispers soft, that woo the pensive mmd 

grown with v^tation; but their tasteful Of hun who loves my lonely st?ps to hail 

owner would suffer httie to be done to them, »t. ,.^„ j., ^,».„ ,^.j t „,A^i, .*[ x. 

andscan*lya»i«gteb»nchtobeloppedfrom &^^^.SS^ ^.^^fpfeg ri,,. ' 

the venerable trees. On an emmence, m one Or soothing ocean's wave, when storms are near, 

of the most sequestered parts of these woods, Or swelling in the breeze fix>m distant hill I 

was a rustic seat formed of the trunk of a l wake the fairy elves, who shun the light; 

decayed oak, which bad once been a* noble When fix)m their blossom'd beds they ^y peep, 

tree, and of v^iicfa many lofty branches still And spy my pale star, leading on the nigfit,— 

flourishing united with beech and pines to Fortii to tiieir games and revelry they leap ; 

over-canopy the spot. Beneath their deep Send all the prison'd sweets abroad in air, 

umbrage, the eye passed over the tops of That with them slumber'd in the floweret's cell ; 

fh^f ft*^ *?^ Mediterranean : and to Sru.eU;hte%ll3Sflu^. "'"•"• 
the left, through an opening, was seen a-,, .* ,,., ... ,, ^ ^ 

ruined watch-tower, standing on a point of The wood-nymphs had my airs wd te^^^ 

^./^/^^, ««>o.. ♦!,-. ---« --.^ -;«• r — AiT With duties soft and lightly sportive dance, 

rock near the sea, and nsing from among the On river margin of some bowery glade, 

tultea loliage. And strew their fresh buds as my steps advance : 

Hither Emily often canie alone in the silence But swift I pass, and distant regions trace, 

of evening ; and soothed by the scenery and For moonbeams silver all the eastern cloud, 

by the faint murmur that rose from the waves. And day's last crimson vestige fades apace ; 

would sit till darkness obliged her to return to Pown the steep west I fly from midnight's shroud. 
the chateau. Frequentiy, also, she visited The moon was now rising out of the sea. She 

the watch-tower, which commanded the en- watched its gradual progress, the extending 

tire prospect ; and when she leaned against line of radiance it threw upoh the waters, the 

its broken walls and thought of Valancourt, sparkling oars, the sail faintly silvered, and the 

she not once imagined, what was so true, that wood-tops and the battlements of the watch- 

^this tower had been ahnost as frequently his tower, at whose foot she was sitting, just 

lesort as her own, since his estrangement tinted with the rays. Emily's spirits were in 

from the neighboiuing chateau. harmony with this scene. As she sat meditat- 

One evening she hngered here to a late hour, ing, sounds stole by her on the air, which she 

She had sat on the steps of the building, immediatelyknewtobe the music and the voice 

watching in tra&quil melancholy the gradual she had formeriy heard at midnight ; and the 

effect of evening over the extensive prospect, ertiotion of awe which she felt was not unmixed 

till the gray waters of the Meddlerranean and >N\\h\error, when she considered her remote and 
the massy woods were almost the ouXy iesc- \o\id^ sy\>MX\Qtv. TVve sounds drew nearer. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, $9 

She would have risen to leave the place ; but * Then the devil has got the key to that 
they seemed to come from the way she must apartment,' said Dorothee, 'for it could be 
have taken towards the chateau, and she nobody but he : I locked the door myself 1' 
awaited the event in trembling expectation. The girl, springing down the stairs and pass- 
The sounds continued to approach for some ing up the great staircase, had run, with a faint 
time, and then ceased. Emily sat listening, scream, till she reached the gallety, where she 
gazing, and unable to move, when she saw a feU, groaning, at Emily's door, 
figure emerge from the shade of the woods, Gently chiding her for the alarm she had 
and pass along the bank, -at some little dis- occasioned, EmUy tried to make her ashamed 
tance before her. It went swiftly ; and her of her fears ; but the girl persisted in saying 
spirits were so overcome with awe, that, that she had seen an appantion, till she went 
though she saw, she did not much observe it to her own room, whither she was accom- 
Having left the spot, with a resolution never panied by all the servants present, except 
again to visit it alone at so late an hour, she Dorothee, who, at Emily's request, remained 
began to approach the chateau, when she with her during the night. Emily was per- 
heard voices calling her from the part of the plexed, and Dorothee was terrified, and men- 
wood which was nearest to it. They were tioned many occiUTences of former times, 
the shouts of the count's servants, who were which had long since confirmed her supersti- 
sent to search for her ; and when she entered tions ; among these, according to her beli^, 
the supper-room, where he sat with Henri and she had once witnessed an appearance like 
Blanche, he gently reproached her with a look that described, and on the vcay same spot ; 
which she Uushed to have deserved. and it was the remembrance of it that had 

The Uttle occurrence deeply impressed her made her pause, when she was going to ascend 
mind; and when she withdrew to her own the stairs with Emily, and which had increased 
room, it recalled so forcibly the circumstances her reluctance to open the north apartments, 
she had witnessed a few nights before, that Whatever might be Emily's opinions, she did 
she had scarcely courage to remain alone, not disclose them, but listened attentively to all 
She watched to a late hour ; when, no sound that Dorothee communicated, v^ch occasioned 
having renewed her fears, she at length sunk her much thought and perplexity, 
to repose. But this was of short continuance, From this night the terror of the servants 
for she was disturbed by a loud and unusual increased to such an excess, that several of 
noise that seemed to come from the gallery them determined to leave the chateau, and 
into which her chamber opened. Groans requested their discharge of the count, who, 
wefe distinctly heard, and immediately after if he had any faith in the subjects of their 
a dead weight fell against the door, with a alarm, thought proper to dissemble it, and, 
violence that threatened to burst it open. She anxious to avoid the inconvenience that threat- 
called loudly to know who was there, but re- ened him, employed ridicule, and then argu- 
ceived no answer, though at intervals she still ment, to convince them they had nothing to 
thought she heard something like a low moan- apprehend from supernatural agency. But 
ing. Fear deprived her of the power to fear had rendered their minds inaccessible to 
move. Soon srfter she heard footsteps in a reason ; and it was now that Ludovico proved 
remote part of the gallery ; and as they ap- at once his courage and his gratitude for the 
proached, she called more loudly than before, kindness he had received from the count, by 
till the steps paused at her door. She then offering to watch, dming a night, in the suite 
distinguished the voices of several of the ser- of rooms reputed to be haunted. ' He feared,' 
vants, who seemed too much engaged by some he said, ' no spirits ; and if anything of human 
circumstance without, to attend to her calls ; form appeared — he would prove that he 
but Annette soon after entering the room for dreaded that as little.' 

water, Emily understood that one of the maids The count paused upon the offer ; while the 
had fainted, whom she immediately desired servants, who heard it, looked upon one 
them to bring into her room, where she another in doubt and amazement : and An- 
assistcd to restore her. When this girl had nette, terrified for the safety of Ludovico, 
recovered her speech, she afBLrmed, that as she employed tears and entreaties to dissuade 
was passing up the back staircase, in the way him from his purpose, 
to her chamber, she had seen an appan- 'You are, a bold fellow,' said the count, 
tion on the second landing-place; she held smiUng ; 'tMnk well of what you are going to 
the lamp low,' she said, ' that she might pick encounter before you finally determine upon it. 
her way, several of the stairs being infirm and However, if you persevere io yout resolution, 
even decayed, and it was upon raismg her I will accept your offer, a^d- your intrepidity 
eyes that she saw this appearance. It stood shall not go Vmrewarded.' 
for a moment in the comer of the landing- ' I desire nt) reward, your Excellenza,' 
place which she was approaching, and then, replied Ludovico, ' but your approbation, 
gliding up the stairs, vanished at the door of Yoiu- Excellenza has been su|licient]y good 
5ie apartment that had been lately opened, to me already ; but I wish to-liave arms, that I 
She heard afterwards a hollow sound.' may be equal to my enemy, if he shoulda33?5ft»x: 



too 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



' Your sword cannot defend you against a 
ghost,' replied the count, throwing a glance of 
irony u[5on the other servants: ' neither can bars 
nor bolts ; for a spirit, you know, can glide 
through a key-hole as easily as through a door. ' 

' Give me a sword, my lord count,' said Lu- 
dovico, • and I will lay all the spirits that shall 
attack me in the Red Sea. ' 

' Well,' said the count, ' You shall have a 
sword, and good cheer too ; and your brave 
comrades here will, perhaps, have courage 
enough to remain another night in the chateau, 
since your boldness will certainly, for this night 
at least, confine all the malice of the spectre to 
yourself. ' 

Curiosity now struggled with fear in the 
minds of several of his fellow-servants, and at 
length they resolved to await the event of Lu- 
dovico'S rashness. 

Emily was surprised and concerned when 
she heard of his intention, and was frequently 
inclined to mention what she had witnessed in 
the north apartments to the count ; for she 
could not entirely divest herself of fears for 
Ludovico's safety, though her reason repre- 
sented these to be absurd. The necessity, 
however, of concealing the secret with which 
Dorothee had intrusted her, and which must 
have been mentioned with the late occurrence, 
in excuse for her having so privately visited 
the north apartments, kept her entirely silent 
on the subject of her apprehension ; and she 
tried only to soothe Annette, who held that 
Ludovico was certainly to be destroyed ; and 
who was much less affected by Emily's con- 
soling efforts than by the manner of old 
Dorothee, who often, as she exclaimed ' Ludo- 
vico,' sighed, and threw up her eyes to Heaven. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

* Ye gods of quiet, and of sleep profound I 
Whose soft dominion o'er this castle sways, 
And all the widely silent places round. 
Forgive me, if my trembling pen displays 
What never yet was sung in mortal lays' 

Thomson. 

The count gave orders for the north apart- 
ments to be opened and prepared for the re- 
ception of Ludovico ; but Dorothee, remem- 
bering what she had lately witnessed there, 
feared to obey ; and not one of the other 
servants daring to venture thither the rooms re- 
mained shut up till the time when Ludovico was 
to retire thither for the night, an hour for which 
the whole household waited with impatience. 
After supper, Ludovico, by the order of the 
count, attended him in his closet, where they 
remained for near half an hour ; and on leaving 
which, his lord delivered to him a sword. 

' It has seen service in mortal quarrels,' said 
the count jocosely ; ' you will use it honourably, 
no doubt, in a spiritual one. To-morrow let 

me hear that there is not otve ghosliesaaimii^ 

in the chateau. ' 



Ludovico received it with a respectful bow. 
• You shall be obeyed, my lord,' said he ; • I 
will engage that no spectre shall disturb the 
peace of the chateau after this night.' 

They now returned to the supper-room, 
where the count's guests awaited to accom- 
pany him and Ludovico to the door of the 
north apartments ; and Dorothee, being sum- 
moned for the keys, delivered them to Ludo- 
vico, who then led the way, followed by most 
of the inhabitants of the chateau. Having 
reached the back staircase, several of the 
servants shrunk back, and refused to go 
further ; but the rest followed him to the top 
of the staircase, where a broad landing-place 
allowed them to flock round him, while he 
applied the key to the door, during which they 
watched him with as much eager cariosity as 
if he had been performing some magical rite. 
^Ludovico, unaccustomed to the lock, could 
not turn it ; and Dorothee, who had lingered 
far behind, was called forward, under whose 
hand the door opened slowly ; and, her eye 
glancing within the dusky uiamber, she ut- 
tered a sudden shriek, and retreated. At this 
signal of alarm the greater part of the crowd 
hurried down the stairs ; and the count, 
Henri, and Ludovico were left alone to pursue 
the inquiry, who instantly rushed into the 
apartment — Ludovico with a drawn sword, 
which he had just time to draw from the 
scabbard ; the count with- the lamp in bis 
hand ; and Henri carrying a basket containing 
provision for the courageous adventurer. 

Having looked hastily round the first room, 
where nothing appeared to justify alarm, they 
passed on to the second ; and here too aU 
being quiet, they proceeded to a third with a 
more tempered step. The count had now 
leisure to smile at the discomposure into which 
he had been surprised, and to ask Ludo>ico 
in which room he designed to pass he night 

' There are several chambers beyond these, 
your Excellenza* said lAidovico, pointing to 
a door, and in one of them is a bed, mey 
say. I will pass the night there ; and when I 
am weary of watching, 1 can lie down.' 

• Good,' said the count ; ' let us goon. You 
see these rooms show nothing but damp wails 
and decaying furniture. I have been so much 
engaged since I came to the chateau, that I 
have not looked into them till now. Re- 
member, Ludovico, to tell the housekeeper 
to-morrow, to throw open these windows. 
The damask hangings are dropping to pieces : 
I will have them taken down, and this antique 
furniture removed.' 

'Dear sirl' said Henri, 'here is an arm- 
chah" so massy with gilding, that it resembles 
one of the state chairs at the Louvre, more 
than anything else. ' 

• Yes,' said the count, stopping a moment to 
stirvey it, ' there is a history belonging to that , 
chair, but I liave not time to tell it— let t» 

\a£& Q)^. TVo&^^^sa. tuns to a greater extent 



THE MYSTBRIES OP VDOLPHO. 



xox 



than 1 had imagined : it is many years since 
I was in them. But where is the bed-room 
you speak of, Ludovico? — these are only 
ante-chambers to the great drawing-room. 
I remember them in their splendour.' 

' The bed, my lord,' replied Ludovico, 
' they told me was in a room that opens 
beyond the saloon, and terminates the suite.' 

' O, here is the saloon,' said the count, as 
they entered the spacious apartment in which 
Emily and Dorothee had rested. He here 
stood for a moment, surveying the relics of 
faded grandeur which it exhibited — the sump- 
tuous tapestry — the long and low sofas of 
velvet, with frames heavily carved and gilded 
— the floor inlaid with small squares of fine 
marble, and covered in the centre with a piece 
of very rich tapestry work — the casements of 
painted glass — and the large Venetian mirrors, 
of a size and quality such as at that period 
France could not make, which reflected on 
every side the spacious apartment. These had 
formerly also reflected a gay and brilliant 
scene, for this had been the state-room of 
the chateau, and here the marchioness had 
held the assemblies that made part of the 
fesdvities of her nuptials. If the wand of a ma- 
gician could have recalled the vanished groupg 
— many of them vanished even from the earth 
— that once had passed over these polished 
mirrors, what a varied and contrasted pictiu^e 
would they have exhibited with the present ! 
Now, instead of a blaze of lights, and a 
splendid and busy crowd, they reflected only 
the rays of the one glimmering lamp, which 
the count held up, and which scarcely served 
to show the three forlorn figures that stood 
surveying the room, and the spacious and 
dusky walls around them. 

• Ah !' said the count to Henri, awaking 
from his deep reverie, ' how the scene is 
changed since last I saw it ! I was a young 
man then ; and the marchioness was alive and 
in her bloom ; many other persons were here, 
too, who are now no more ! There stood the 
orchestra ; here we tripped in many a sprightly 
maze — the walls echoing to the dance ! Now, 
they resound only one feeble voice — and even 
that will, ere long, be heard no more ! My 
son, remember that I was once as young as 
yourself, and that you must pass away like 
those who have preceded you — Tike those who, 
as they sung and danced in this once gay 
apartment, forgot that years are made up of 
moments, and that every step they took car- 
ried them nearer to their graves. But such 
reflecdons are useless, I had almost said cri- 
minal, unless they teach us to prepare for 
eternity ; since otherwise they cloud our pre- 
sent happiness, without guiding us to a future 
one. But enough of this — let us go on. ' 

Ludovico how opened the door of the bed- 
room, and the count, as he entered, was strack 
with the funereal appearance which the dark 
arras gave to it He approached the bed 



with an emotion of solemnity, and, perceiving 
it to be covered with the pall of black velvet, 
paused : ' What can this mean?' said he, as he 
gazed upon it. 

' I have heard, my lord,' said Ludovico, as 
he stood at the feet looking wthin the cano- 
pied curtains, ' that the Lady Marchioness de 
Villeroi died in this chamber, and remained 
here till she was removed to be buried ; and 
this perhaps, signor, may account for the 
pall/ 

The count made no reply, but stood for a 
few moments enp^aged in thought, and evi- 
dently much affected. Then, turning to 
Ludovico, he asked him with a serious air 
whether he thought his courage would sup- 
port him through the night? ' If you doubt 
this,' added the count, ' do not be ashamed to 
own it ; I will release you from your engage- 
ment, without exposing you to the triimiphs 
of your lellow-ser\'ants.' 

Ludovico paused ; pride, and something 
very like fear, seemed struggling in his breast : 
pride, however, was victorious ; — he blushed, 
and his hesitation ceased. 

' No, my lord,' said he, • I will go through 
with what I have begun ; and I am grateful 
for your consideration. On that hearth I will 
make a fire, and, with the good cheer in this 
basket, I doubt not I shall do well. 

• Be it so,' said the count ; ' but how will you 
beguile the tediousness of the night, if you do 
not sleep?" 

• When I am weary, my lord,' replied Lu- 
dovico, ' I shall not fear to sleep ; in the 
meanwhile I have a book that will entertain 
me.' 

•Well,' said the count, 'I hope nothing 
will disturb you ; but if you should be seriously 
alarmed in the night, come to my apartment. 
I have too much confidence in your good sense 
and courage to beheve you will be ^rmed on 
slight grounds, or suffer the gloom of this 
chamber, or its remote situation, to overcome 
you with id^ terrors. To-morrow I shall 
have to thank you for an important service ; 
these rooms shsdl then be thrown open, and 
my people will be convinced of their error. 
Good night, Ludovico ; let me see you early 
in the morning, and remember what I lately 
said to you.' 

• I will, my lord ; good night to your Excel- 
lenza, — let me attend you with the light.' 

He lighted the count and Henri through 
the chambers to the outer door. On the land- 
ing-place stood a lamp, which one of the 
affrighted servants had left ; and Henri, as he 
took it up, again bade Ludovico good night, 
who haying respectfully returned the wish, 
closed the door upon them, and fastened it. 
Then, as he retired to the bed-chamber, he 
examined the rooms through which he passed, 
with more minuteness thaii he had done be- 
fore, for he apprehended that some person 
might have concealed himself in them, for ♦*"• 



toa 



THE MVSTERtES OF VDOLPHO, 



purpose of frightening him. No one, how- 
ever, but himself was in these chambers ; and 
leaving open the doors through which he 
passed, he came again to the great drawing- 
room, whose spaciousness and silent gloom 
somewhat awed him. For a moment he stood, 
looking back through the long suite of rooms 
he had quitted ; and as he turned, perceiving 
a light and his own figure reflected in one of 
the large mirrors, he started. Other objects 
too were seen obscurely on its dark siuface ; 
but he paused not to examine them, and re- 
turned hastily into the bed-room, as he sur- 
veyed which, he observed the door of the oriel, 
and opened it. All within was still. On look- 
ing round, his eye was arrested by the por- 
trait of the deceased marchioness, upon which 
he gazed for a considerable time with great 
attention and some surprise ; and then, having 
examined the closet, he returned into the bed- 
room, where he kindled a wood fire, the bright 
blaze of which revived his spirits, which had 
begun to yield to the gloom and silence of the 
place, for gusts of wind alone broke at inter- 
vals this silence. He now drew a small table 
and a chair near the fire, took a bottle of 
wine and some cold provision out of his 
basket, and regaled himself. When he had 
finished his repast, he laid his sword upon 
the table, and, not feeling disposed to sleep, 
drew from his pocket the book he had spoken 
of. — It was a Volume of old Proven9al tales. 
— Having stirred the fire into a brighter blaze, 
trimmed his lamp, and drawn his chair upon 
the hearth, he began to read, and his atten- 
tion was soon wholly occupied by the scenes 
which the page disclosed. 

The coimt, meanwhile, had returned to the 
supper-room, whither those of the party who 
had attended him to the north apartment had 
retreated, upon hearing Doroth^e's scream, 
and who were now earnest in their inquiries 
concerning those chambers. The count rallied 
his guests on their precipitate retreat, and on 
the superstitious inclination which had occa- 
sioned it ; and this led to the question, Whe- 
ther the spirit, after it has quitted the body, 
is ever permitted to revisit the earth ; and if it 
is, whether it was possible for spirits to be- 
come visible to the sense? The baron was of 
opinion that the first was probable, and the 
last was possible ; and he endeavoured to 
justify this opinion by respectable authorities, 
both ancient and modem, which he quoted. 
The coimt, however, was decidedly against 
him ; and a long conversation ensued, in 
which the usual arguments on these subjects 
were on both sides brought forward with skill, 
and discussed with candour, but without con- 
verting either party to the opinion of his op. 
ponent The eSect of their conversation on 
their auditors was various. Though the count 
had much the superiority of. the baron in point 
of argument, he had considerably fewer ad- 
herents ; ,for that love, so natural to the human 



mind, of whatever is able to distend its faculties 
with wonder and astonishment,, attached the 
majority of the company to the side of the 
baron ; and though many of the count's propo- 
sitions were unanswerable, his opponents were 
inclined to believe this the consequence of their 
own want of knowledge on so abstracted a sub- 
ject, rather than that arguments did not exist 
which were forcible enough to conquer his. 

Blanche w^ pale with attention, till the 
ridicule in her father's glance called a blush 
upon her countenance, and she then en- 
deavoured to forget the superstitious tales she 
had been told in her convent. Meanwhilci 
Emily had been listening with deep attention 
to the discussion of what was to her a very 
interesting question ; and remembering the 
appearance she had witnessed in the apart- 
ment of the late marchioness, she was fre- 
quently chilled with awe. Several times she 
was on the point of mentioning what she had 
seen ; but the fear of giving pain to the count, 
and the dread of his ridicule, restrained her ; 
and awaiting in anxious expectation the event 
of Ludovico s intrepidity, she determined that 
her future ^ence should depend upon it. 

When the party had separated for the night, 
and the count retired to his dressing-room, 
the remembrance of the desolate scenes he 
had lately witnessed in his own mansion deeply 
affected him, but at length he was arousea 
from his reverie and his silence. • What 
music is that I hear?* said he suddenly to his 
valet ; ' Who plays at this late hour !' 

The man made no reply ; and the count con- 
tinued to listen, and then added, * That is no 
common musician ; he touches the instrument 
widi a delicate hand — ^who is it, Pierre?* 

• My lord !' said the man hesitatingly. 

• Who plays that instrument?' repeated the 
count. 

' Does not your lordship know, then?' said 
the valet 

•What mean you?' ssdd the count, some- 
what sternly. 

' Nothing, my lord, I meant nothing,* re- 
joined the man submissively — ' only — that mu- 
sic — ^goes about the house at midnight often, 
and I thought your lordship might have heard 
it before.' 

• Music goes about the house at midnight I 
Poor fellow I — does nobody dance to the mu- 
sic, too ?' 

' It is not in the chateau, I believe, my lord ; 
the sounds come from the woods, they say, 
though they seem so near ; — ^but then a spirit 
can do anything.' 

' Aht poor fdlow I' said the count, ' I per- 
ceive you are as silly as the rest of them ; to- 
morrow you will be convinced of your ridiculous 
error. But hark I — ^what voice is that ?' 

' Oh, my lord I that is the voice we often 
hear with Uie music' 

' Often 1' said the count : ' How often, pray ? 
It is a very fine one.' 



THE MYSTERIBS OF UDOLPHO. 103 

• Why, my lord, I myself have not heard it and heroic manners which usually charac- 
more than two or three times ; but there are terised the fables of the twelfth century, and 
those who have lived here longer, that have of this description was the one he now hap- 
heard it often enough.' pened to open ; which in its original style was 

•What a swell was thatl' exclaimed the ofgreatlength, but which may be thus shortly 

count, as he still listened — ' and now what a related. The reader will perceive that it is 

dying cadence 1 This is surely something strongly tinctured with the superstition of the 

more than mortal !' times. 

• That is what they say, my lord,' said the THE PROVENCAL TALE, 
valet ; • they say it is nothing mortal that • 

utters it ; and if I might say my thoughts ' ' There lived in t^ie province of Bretagne a 

' Peace !' said the count, and he listened till noble baron, famous for his magnificence and 

the strain died awav. courdy hospitalities. His casUe was graced 

• This is strange !' said he, as he turned from with ladies of exquisite beauty, and thronged 
the window — ' Close the casements, Pierre.' with illustrious knights ; for the honours he 

Pierre obeyed, and the count soon after dis- paid to feats of chivalry invited the brave of 
missed him ; but did not so soon lose the re- distant countries to enter his lists, and his 
membranceofthe music, which long vibrated in court was more splendid than those of many 
his fancy in tones of melting sweetness, while princes. Eight minstrels were retained in his 
surprise and perplexity engaged his thoughts, service, who used to sine to their harps roman- 

Ludovico. meanwhile, in his remote cnam- tic fictions taken from ue Arabians, or adven- 
ber, heard now and then the faint echo of a tures of diivalry that befel knights during the 
closing door as the family retired to rest, and Crusades, .or the martial deeds of the boron, 
then the hall dock at a great distance strike theirlord ; — while he, surroimded by his knights 
twelve. • It is midnight,' said he,— and he and ladies, banqueted m the great hall of his 
looked suspiciously round the spacious cham- castle, where the costly tapestry that adorned 
ber. The fire on the hearth was now nearly the waUs with pictured exploits of his an- 
expiring ; for, his attention having been en- cestors, the casements of painted glass en- 
gaged oy the book before him. he had for- riched with armorial bearings, the gorgeous 
gotten everything besides ; but he soon added banners that waved along the roof, the sump- 
n^sh wood, not because he was cold, though tuous canopies, the profusion of gold and 
the night was stormy, but because he was silver that glittered on the sideboards, the 
cheerless ; and having again trimmed his numerous d&hes that covered the tables, the 
lamp, he poured out a glass of wine, drew number and gay liveries of the attendants, 
his chair nearer to the crackling blaze, tried to with the chivaJric and splendid attire of the 
be deaf to the wind that howled mournfully guests, united to form a scene of magnifi- 
at the casements, endeavoured to abstract his cence, such as we may not hope to see in 
mind from the melancholy that was stealing these degenerate days. 

upon him. and again took up his book. It ' Of the baron the following adventure is 
had been lent to him by Dorothy, who had related. One nieht, having retired late from 
formerly picked it up in an obscure comer of the banquet to his chamber, and dismissed 
the marquis's library, and who, having his attendants, he was surprised by the ap- 
opened it and perceived some of the marvels pearance of a stranger of a noble air, but of 
it related, had carefully preserved it for her a sorrowful and dejected countenance. Be- 
own entertainment, its condition giving her lieving that this person had been secreted in 
some excuse for detaining it from its proper the apartment, since it appeared impossible 
station. The damp comer into which it had he could have lately passed the ante-room un- 
fallen had caused the cover to be disfigured observed by the pages in waiting, who would 
and mouldy, and the leaves to be so dis- have prevented this intrusion on theirlord, 
coloured with spots, that it was not without the baron, calling loudly for his people, drew 
difficulty the letters could be traced. The his sword, which he had not yet taken from 
fictions of the Proven9al writers, whether his side, and stood upon his defence. The 
drawn from the Arabian legends brought by stranger, slowly advancing, told him that 
the Saracens into Spain, or recounting the there was nothing to fear ; that he came vrith 
chivalijc exploits performed by the cru^ders no hostile design, but to communicate to him 
whom the tJX)ul»dors accompanied to the a terrible secret, which it was necessary for 
Blast, were generally splendid, and always him to know. 

marvellous both in scenery and incident ; and ' The Ixiron, appeajsed by the courteous 
it is not wonderful that Doroth^e and Ludo- manners of the stranger, after surveying him 
vied should be fascinated by inventions which for some time in silence, returned his sword 
had captivated the careless imagination in into the scabbard, and desired him to explain 
evenr rank of society in a former age. Some the means by which he had obtained access to 
of the talcs, however, in the book now before Uie chamber, and the purpose of this extra- 
Ludovico were of simple structure, and ex- ordinary visit* 
hibited nothing of the magnificent machinery ' Without answering either of these in^ 



I04 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

quiries, the stranger said that he 'could not stranger, whose extraordinary request he 

then explain himself, but that if the baron feared to grant, and feared also to refuse, 

would follow him to the edge of the forest, at At length he said, "Sir knight, you are utterly 

a short distance from the castle walls, he unknown to me ; tell me yourself, — ^is it 

would there convince him that he had some- reasonable that I should trust myself alone 

thing of importance to disclose. with a stranger, at this hour, in a solitaxy 

'This proposal again alarmed the baron, who forest? Tell me, at least, who you are, and 

would scarcely believe that the stranger meant who assisted to secrete you in this chamber." 

to draw him to so solitary a spot at this hour ' The knight frowned at these latter words, 

of the night; without harbouring a design and was a moment silent ; then, with a coun- 

against his life ; and he refused to go, observ- tenance somewhat stem, he said, 

ing, at the same time, that if the stranger's * "I am an English knight ; I am called 

purpose vras an honourable one, he would not Sir Bevys of Lancaster. — and my deeds are 

persist in refusing to reveal the occasion of not unknown at the Holy City,, whence I was 

his visit in the apartment where they were. returning to my native land, when I was be- 

• While he spoke this, he viewed the stranger nighted in the neighbouring forest " 

still more attentively than before, but observed '"Your name is not unknown to fame," 
no change in his countenance, nor any symp- said the baron ; " I have heard of it. (The 
tom that might intimate a consciousness of knight looked haughtily.) But why, since 
evil design. He was habited like a knight, my castle is known to entertain all true 
was of a tall and majestic stature, and of knights, did not your herald announce you ? 
dignified and courteous manners. Still, how- Why did you not appear at the banquet, 
ever, he refused to communicate the subject where your presence would have been wel- 
of his errand in any place but that he had corned, instead of hiding yourself in my 
mentioned ; and at the same time gave hints castle, and stealing to my chamber at mid- 
concerning the secret he would disdose, that night ?" 

awakened a degree of solemn curiosity in the ' The stranger frowned, and turned away in 

baron, which at length induced him to consent silence ; but the baron repeated the questions, 

to the stran|fer on certain t^onditions. ' "I come not," said the knight, "to answer 

"'Sir knight," said he, " I will attend you inquiries, but to reveal facts. If you would 

to the forest, and will take with me only four know more, follow me, and again I pledge 

of my people, who shall witness our con- the honoiu- of a knight that you shall return 

ference." in safety. Be quick in your determination — ^I 

' To this, however, the knight objected. must be gone." 

• " What I would disclose," said he with ' After some further hesitation, the baron 
solemnity, "is to you alone. There are only determined to follow the stranger, and to see 
three living persons to whom the circumstance the result of his* extraordinary request : he 
is known : it is of more consequence to you therefore again drew forth his sword, and, 
and your house than I shall now explain. In taking up a lamp, bade the knight lead on. 
future years ^ou will look back to this night The latter obeyed ; and openiilg the door of 
with satisfaction or repentance, accordingly as the chamber, they passed int^ the ante-room, 
you now determine. As you would hereafter where the baron, surprised to find all his 
prosper — follow me ; I pledge you the honour pages asleep, stopped, and with hasty violence 
of a knight, that no evil shall befall you. If was going to reprimand them for their care- 
you are contented to dare futurity — remain lessness, when the knight waved his hand, 
m your chamber, and I will depart as I came." and looked so expressively upon the baron, 

' " Sir knight," replied the baron, " how is that the latter restrained his resentment, and 

it possible that my future peace can depend passed on. 

upon my present determination ?" 'The knight, having descended a staircase, 

•"That is not now to be told," said the opened a secret door which the baron had 
stranger; "I have explained myself to the believed was known only to himself, and, pro- 
utmost. It is late ; if you follow me, it must ceeding through several narrow and winding 
be quickly ; — you will do well to consider the passages, came at length to a small gate that 
alternative. " opened beyond the walls . of the /castle. 

• The baron mused ; and as he looked upon Meanwhile the baron followed in silence and 
the knight, he perceived his countenance amazement, on perceiving ths^^ these' secret 
assume a singular solemnity. passages were so well known to a strange, 

[Here Ludovico thought he heard a noise, and felt inclined to return from an adventure 

and he threw a glance round the chamber, that appeared to partake of treachery as Well 

and then held up the lamp to assist his obser- as danger. Then, considering that he was 

vation ; but not perceiving anything to con- armed; and observing the courteous and noble 

firm his alarm, he took up the book again, air of his conductor,' his courage returned, he 

and pursued the stoiy.] blushed that it had failed him for a moment, 

' The baron paced his apartment for some and" he resolved 19 trace the mystery to its 

tipie in sil^ce, impressed by the words pf the source. ; . 



THE MYSTBRIBS OF VDOLPHO, lOg 

' He now found himself on the heathy plat- hand, fixed upon him a look so earnest and 

form before the great gates of his castle, mournful, as not only much surprised him, 

where, on looking up, he perceived lights but made him desist. 

glimmering in the different casements of the * But what were the baron's emotions, when, 

guests, who were retiring to sleep ; and while on holding the lamp near the features of the 

he shivered in the blast, and looked on the corpse, he discovered the exact resemblance 

dark and desolate scene around him, he of the stranger bis conductor, to whom he 

thought of the comforts of his warm chamber now looked up in astonishment and inquiry ! 

rendered cheerful by the blaze of wood, As he gazed, ne perceived the countenance of 
and felt, for a moment, the full contrast of the knight change and begin to fade, till his 

his present situation. whole form gradually vanished from his as- 

[Here Eudovico paused a moment, and, tonished sense I While the baron stood, fixed 

looking at his own fire, gave it a brightening to the spot, a voice was heard to utter these 

stirj . words : — 

' The wind was strong, and the baron watched [Ludovico started , and laid down the book, 
his lamp with anxiety, expecting every mo- forhe thought he heard av<Mce in the chamber, 
ment to see it extinguished ; but though the and he looked toward the bed, where, how- 
flame wavered, it did not expire, and he still ever, he saw only the dark curtains and the 
foUowed the stranger, who often sighed as he pall. He listened, scarcely daring to draw 
went, but did not speak. his breath, but heard only the distant roaring 

'When they reached the borders of the of the sea in the storm, and the blast that 

forest, the knight turned and raised his rushed by the casements ; when, concluding 

head, as if he meant to address the baron ; that he had been deceived by its sighings, he 

but then closing his lips in silence, he walked took up his book to finish the story.] 

on. ' " The body of Sir Bevys of Lancaster,' a 

• As they entered beneath the daric and noble knight of England, hes before you. He 

spreading boughs, the baron, affected by the was this night way-laid and murdered, as he 

solemnity of the scene, hesitated whether to journeyed from the Holy City towards his 

proceed, and demanded how much further native land. Respect the honour of knight- 

they were to go. The knight replied hood and the law of humanity ; inter the 

only by a gesture ; and the baron, with hesi- body in Christian ground, and cause his mur- 

tating steps and a suspicions eye, followed derers to be punished. As ye observe or 

through an obscure and intricate path, till, neglect this, shall peace and happiness, or 

having proceeded a considerable way, he war and misery, light upon you and your house 

again demanded whither they were going, forever!" 

and refused to proceed unless he was informed. 'The baron, when he recovered from the 

' As he said this, he looked at his own awe and astonishment into which this adven- 

sword and at the knight alternately, who ture had thrown him, returned to his castle, 

shook his head, and whose dejected coun- whither he caused the body of Sir Bevys to be 

tenance disarmed the baron, for a moment, removed ; and on the following day it was 

of suspicion. interred, with the honours of knighthood, in 

'"Alittle further is4he place whither I would the chapel of the castle, attended by all the 

lead you," said the stranger: "no evil shall noble knights and ladies who graced the coiut 

befall you — I have sworn it on the honour of of Baron de Brunne.' 
a knight" 

'The baron, re-assured, again followed in Ludovico, having finished this story, laid 

silence, and they soon arrived at a deep re- aside the book, for he felt drowsy ; and after 

cess of the forest, where the dark and lofty putting more wood on the fire, and taking 

chesnuts entirely excluded the sky, and which another glass of wine, he reposed himself in 

was so overgrown with undeVwood that they the arm-chair on the hearth. In his dream he 

proceeded with difficulty. The knight sighed still beheld the chamber where he really was, 

deeply as he passed, and sometimes paused ; and once or twice started from imperfect 

and having at length reached a spot where slumbers, imagining he saw a man's face 

the trees crowded into a knot, he turned, and looking over the high back of his arm-chair, 

with a terrific look, pointing to the ground. This idea had so strongly impressed him, that 

the baron saw there the body of a man when he raised his eyes he almost expected to 

stretched at its length and weltering in blood ; meet other eyes fixed upon his own ; and he 

a ghastly wound was on the forehead, and quitted his seat, and looked behind the chair, 

death appeared already to have contracted the before he felt perfectly convinced that no pcr- 

features. son was there. 

' The baron, on perceiving the spectacle, Thus closed the hour, 
started in horror, looked at the knight for ex- 
planation, and was then going to raise the ^^ 
body, and examine if there were yet any re- """ 
mains of li£e ; but the stranger, waving his 



xo6 



THB MYSTERIES OP UDOLPBO, 



CHAPTER XLV. 



' Enjoy the honey-heavy dew of slumber ; 
Thou hast no figures, nor no fantasies. 
Which busy care draws in the brains of men ; 
Therefore uiou sleep'st so soimd.' 

Shakespeare* 

Thb count, who had slept little during the 
night, rose early, and anxious to speak with 
Ludovico, went to the north apartment ; but 
the outer dotx living been fastened on the 

f)receding night, he was obliged to knock 
oudly for admittance. Neither the knocking 
nor Kis voice was heard ; but considering the 
distance of this door from the bedroom, and 
that Ludovico, wearied with watching, had 
probably fallen into a deep sleep, the count 
was not surprised on receiving no answer ; 
and leaving the door, he went down to walk 
in his grounds. 

It was a grey autumnal morning. The sun, 
rising over Provence, gave only a feeble light, 
as his rays struggled through the vapoiu-s 
that ascended from the sea, and floated heavily 
over the woodtops, which were now varied 
with many a mellow tint of autumn. The 
storm was passed, but the waves yet violently 
agitated, and their course was traced by long 
lines of foam, while not a breeze fluttered 
in the sails of the vessels near the shore that 
were weighing anchor to depart. The still 
gloom of the hour was pleasing to the count, 
and he pursued his way through the woods 
sunk in deep thought. 

Emily also rose at an early hour, and took 
her customary walk along the brow of the 
promontory that overhung the Mediterranean. 
Her mind was not now occupied with the 
occurrences of the chateau, and Valancourt 
was the subject of her mournful thoughts ; 
whom she had not yet taught herself to con- 
sider with indifference, though her judgment 
constantly reproached her for the affection 
that lingered in her heart, after her esteem for 
him was departed. Remembrance frequently 
gave her his parting look and the tones of his 
voice when he had bade her a last farewell ; 
and some accidental associations now recall- 
ing these circumstances to her fancy with 
peculiar energy, she shed bitter tears at the 
recollection. 

Having reached the watch-tower, she seated 
herself on the broken steps, and in melancholy 
dejection watched the waves, half hid in a 
vapour, as they came rolling towards the 
shore, and thr^w up their light spray round 
the rocks below. Their hollow murmur, and 
the obscuring mists that came in wreaths up 
the cliffs, gave a solemnity to the scene which 
was in harmony with the temper of her mind, 
and she sat, given up to the remembrance of 
past times, till this became too painful, and 
she abruptly quitted the place. On passing 
the little gate of the watch-tower, she observed 
letters engraved on the stone postern, which 
<he paused to examine ; and though they 



appeared to have been rudely cut with a pen- 
knife, the characters were familiar to her : at 
length, recognising the handwriting of Valan- 
court she read with trembllQg anxiety, the 
following lines, entitled 

SHIPWRECK. 

'Tis schema midnight i On this lonelv steep, 

Beneath this watch-tower's desolated wall. 

Where mystic shapes the wanderer appall, 

I rest ; and view below the desert deep. 

As through tempestuous clouds the nuxMi's cold 

light 
Gleams on the wave. Viewless, the winds of night 
With loud mysterious force the billows sweep, 
And sullen roar the surges far below. 
In the still pauses of the gust I hear 
The voice of spirits rising sweet and slow. 
And oft among the clouds their forms appear. 
'But hark ! what shriek of death comes in the gale. 
And in the distant ray what glimmering sail 
Bends to the storm ? — Now smks the note of fear 1 
Ah ! wretched mariners ! — no more shall day 
Unclose his cheering eye to light you on your way I 

From these lines it appeared that Valaur 
court had visited the tower ; that he had pro- 
bably been here on the preceding night, for it 
was such a one as they described, and that he 
had left the building very lately, since it had 
not long been light, and without Ught it was 
impossible these letters could have been cut 
It was thus even probable that he might be yet 
in the gardens. 

As these reflections passed rapidly over the 
mind of Emily, they called up a variety of 
contending emotions, that almost overcame 
her spirits : but her first impulse was to avoid 
him, and immediately leaving the tower, she 
returned with hasty steps towards the chateau. 
As she passed along, she remembered the 
music she had lately heard near the tower, 
with the figvue whidi had appeared ; and in 
this moment of agitation she was inclined to 
believe that she had then heard and seen 
Valancourt ; but other recollections soon con- 
vinced her of her error. On turning into a 
thicker part of the woods, she perceived a 
person walking slowly in the gloom at some 
little distance ; and, her mind engaged by the 
idea of him, she started and paused, imagin- 
ing this to be Valancourt. The person ad- 
vanced with quicker steps ; and before she 
could recoverrecoUection enough to avoid him, 
he spoke, and she then knew the voice of the 
count, who expressed some surprise on find- 
ing her walking at so early an hour, and made 
a feeble effort to rally her on her love of soli- 
tude. But he soon perceived this to be more 
a subject of concern than of light laughter, 
and changing his manner, affectionately ex- 
postulated with Emily on thus indulging un- 
availing regret, who, though she acknowledged 
the justness of all he said, could not restrain 
her tears while she did so, and he presently 
quitted the topic. Expressing surprise at not . 
having yet heard from his friend, the advocate 
at Avignon, in answer to Uie questions pro- 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 107 

posed to him respecting the estates of the late which, still receiving no answer, he threw 
Madame Montoni. he with friendly zeal en- open the door of the bed-room and entered, 
deavoured to cheer Emily with hopes of The proformd stillness within confirmed his 
establishing her claim to them ; while she apprehensions for Ludovico, for not even the 
felt that uie estates could now contribute breathings of a person in sleep was heard; 
little to the happiness of a life in which Valan- and his uncertainty was soon terminated, 
court had no longer an interest. since, the shutters being all closed, the cham- 

When they returned to the chateau, Emily ber was too dark for any object to be distin- 
retired to her apartment, and Count de Ville- guished in it. 

fort to the door of the north chambers. This The count bade a servant open them, who, 
was still fastened ; but being now determined as he crossed the room to do so, stumbled 
to arouse Ludovico, he renewed his calls more over something and fell to the floor ; when 
loudly than before ; after which a total silence his cry occasioned such panic among the few 
ensued ; and the count, finding all his efforts of his fellows who had ventured thus far, that 
to be heard inefifectual, at length be^m to fear they instantly fled, and the count and Henri 
that some accident had befallen Ludovico, were left to fin«h the adventure, 
whom terror of an imaginary being might Henri then sprung across the room, and 
have deprived of his senses. He therefore opening a window-shutter, they perceived that 
left the door with an intention of summoning the man had fallen over a chair near the hearth 
his servants to force it open, some of whom in which Ludovico had been sitting ; — for he 
he now heard moving in the lower part of the sat there no longer, nor could he any where be 
chateau. seen by the imperfect light that was admitted 

To the count's inquiries, whether they had into the apartment. The count, seriously 
seen or heard Ludovico, they replied, m af- alarmed, now opened other shutters, that he 
fright, that not one of them had ventured on might be enabled to examine further ; and 
the north side of the chateau since the pre- Ludovico, not yet appearing, he stood for 
ceding night. a moment suspended in astonishment, and 

• He sleeps soundly then,* said the count, scarcely trusting his senses, till his eyes glanc- 
* and is at such a distance from the outer door, ing on the bed, he advanced to examine 
which is fastened, that to gain admittance to whether he was th«re asleep. No person, 
the chambers it will be necessary to force it. however, was in it ; and he proceeded to the 
Bring an instrument and follow me.' oriel, where eveirthing remained as on the 

The servant stood mute and dejected ; and preceding night, but Ludovico was no where 
it was not till nearly all the household were to be found. 

assembled, that the count's orders were The count now checked his amazement, 
obeyed. In the meantime, Dorothee was considering that Ludovico might have left the 
telling of a door that opened from a gallery chambers during the night, overcome by the 
leading from the great staircase into the last terrors which their lonely desolation and the 
ante-room of the saloon ; and this being much recollected reports concerning them had in- 
nearer to the bed-chamber, it appeared pro- spired. Yet, if this had been the fact, the 
bable that Ludovico might be easily awakened man would naturally have sought society, 
by an attempt to open it Thidier, therefore, the and his fellow-servants had all declared 
count went : but his voice was as ine£fectual at they had not seen him ; the door of the outer 
this door as it had proved at the remoter one : room also had been found fastened with the 
and now, seriously interested for Ludovico, key on the inside. It was impossible, therefore, 
he was himself going to strike upon the door for him to have passed through that ; and all 
with the instrument, when he observed its the outer doors of this suite were found, on ex- 
singular beauty, and withheld the blow. It araination, to be bolted and locked, with the 
appeared on the first glance to be of ebony, keys also within them. The count, being then 
so dark and jclose was its grain, and so high compelled to believe that the lad had escaped 
its polish ; but it proved to be only of larch through the casements, next examined them ; 
wood, of the growth of Provence, then famous but such as opened wide enough to admit the 
for its forests of larch. The beauty of its body of a man were found to be carefully se- 
polished hue, and of its delicate carvings, de- cured either by iron bars or by shutters, and 
tcr mined the count to spare this door, and he no vestige appeared of any person having 
returned to that leading from the back stair- attempted to pass them ; neither was it pro- 
case ; which, being at length forced, he bable that Ludovico would have incurred the 
entered the first ante-room, followed by risk of breaking his neck by leaping from a 
Henri and a few of the most courageous of window, when he might have walked safely 
his servants, the rest awaiting the event through a door. 

of the inquiry on the stairs and landing- The count's amazement did not admit of 
place. words ; but he returned once more to examine 

All was silent in the chambers through which the bed-room, where was no appearance of 
the count passed ; and, having reached the disorder, except that occasioned by the late 
saloon, he called loudly upon Ludovico ; after overthrow of ue chaiFi near which had stood ^ 



xo8 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHQ. 

small table; and on this Ludovico's sword, by the disastrous fate of the late marchioness, 

his lamp, the book he had been reading, and and with the mysterious connexion which she 

the remnant ofhis flask of wine, still remained, fancied had existed between her and St 

At the foot of the table, too, was the basket Aubert, was particularly impressed by the late 

with some fragments of provision and wood, extraordinary event, and much concerned for 

Henri and the servant now uttered their as- the loss of Ludovico, whose integrity and 
tonishment without reserve ; and though the faithful services claimed both her esteem and 
count said little, there was a seriousness in gratitude. She was now very desirous to re- 
his manner that expressed much. It appeared turn to the quiet retirement of her convent ; 
that Ludovico must have quitted these rooms but every hint of this was received with real 
by some concealed passage, for the count sorrow by Lady Blanche, and affectionately 
could not believe that any supernatural means set aside by the count, for whom she felt much 
had occasioned this event ; yet, if there was of the respectful love and admiration of a 
any such passage, it seemed inexplicable why daughter, and to whom, by Dorothee's consent, 
he should retreat through it ; and it was she at length mentioned the appearance which 
equally surprising, that not even the smallest they had witnessed in the chamber of the de- 
vestige should appear, by which his progress ceased marchioness. At any other period he 
could be traced. In the rooms everything re- would have smiled at such a relation, and have 
mained as much in order as if he had just believed that its object had existed only in the 
walked out by the common way. distempered fancy of the relater ; but he now 

The count himself assisted in lifting the attended to Emily with seriousness ; and, when 
arras with which the bed-chamber, saloon, she concluded, requested of her a promise 
and one of the ante-rooms were hung, that he that this occurrence should rest in silence, 
might discover if any door had been con- ' Whatever may be the cause and the import 
ceaied behind it ; but, after a laborious search, of these extraordinary occurrences,' added the 
none was found : and he at length quitted count, ' time only can explain them. I shall 
Ihe apartments, having secured the door of keep a wary eye upon all that passes in the 
the last ante-chamber, the key of whiqh he chateau, and shall pursue every possible means 
took into his own possession. He then gave of discovering the fate of Ludovico. Mean- 
orders that strict search should be made for while, we must be prudent and silent. I will 
Ludovico, not only in the chateau, but in the myself watch in the north chambers ; but 
neighbourhood; and retiring with Henri to of this we will say nothing till the night 
his closet, they remained there in conversa- arrives when I purpose doing so.' 
tion for a considerable time ; and, whatever The count then sent for Dorothee, and re- 
was the subject of it, Henri from this hour quired of her also a promise of silence con- 
lost much of his vivacity, and his manners ceming what she had already, or might in 
were particularly grave and reserved when- future witness of an extraordinary nature: 
ever the topic which now agitated the and this ancient servant now related to him 
count's family with wonder and alarm was the particulars of the Marchioness de Villeroi's 
introduced. death, with some of which he appeared to be 

On the disappearing of Ludovico, Baron already acquainted, while by others he was 
St. Foix seemed strengthened in all his former evidently surprised and agitated. After listen- 
opinions concerning the probability of appari- ing to this narrative, the count retired to his 
tions, though it was difficult to discover what closet, where he remained alone for several 
connexion there could possibly be between the hours ; and when he again appeared, the 
two subjects, or to account for this effect, other- solemnity of his manner surprised and alarmed 
wise than by supposing that the raysteryattend- Emily, but she gave no utterance to her 
ing Ludovico, by exciting awe and curiosity, thoughts. 

reduced the mind to a state of sensibility On the week following the disappearance of 
which rendered it more liable to the influence Ludovico, all the count's guests took leave of 
of superstition in general It is however cer- him, except the baron, his son, Mons. St Foix, 
tain, that from this period the baron and his and Emily ; the latter of whom was soon after 
adherents became more bigoted in their own embarrassed and distressed by the arrival of 
systems than before, while the terrors of the another visitor, Mons. du Pont, which made 
coimt's servants increased to an excess that her determine upon withdrawing to her con- 
occasioned many of them to quit the mansion vent immediately. The delight that appeared 
immediately, and the re^ remained only till in his countenance when he met her, told that 
others "coiUd be procured to supply their he brought back the same ardour of passion 
places. which had formerly banished him from 

The most strenuous search after Ludovico Chateau-le- Blanc. He was received with re- 
proved unsuccessful ; and after several days serve by Emily, and with pleasure by the 
of indefatigable inquiry, poor Annette gave count, who presented him to her with a 
herselfup to despair, and the other inhabitants smile that seemed intended to plead his 
pf the chateau to amazement cause, and who did not hope the less for his 

pmUy, Vfkos^ ^liad had Ipeen deeply affected friend, from the embarrassment she betrayed. 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 109 

But M. du Post, with truer sympathy, been tenderly attached to jrott ; his family and 

seemed to understand her manner, and ms fortune are unexceptionable : — after what I 

countenance quickly lost its vivacity, and sunk have said, it is unnecessary to add, that I 

into the langucn: of despondency. should rejoice in vour felicity, and that I think 

On the following day, however, he sought M. du Pont would promote it. Do not weep 

an opportunity of declaring the piuTX)rt of his Emily,' continued the count, taking her hand, 

visit, and renewed his suit; a declaration 'there «j happiness reserved for you.' 

which was received with real concern by He was silent a moment ; ana then added 

Emily, who endeavoured to lessen the pain in a firmer voice, ' I do not wish that you 

she might inflict by a second rejection, with should make a violent effort to overcome your 

assurances of esteem and friendship : yet she feeling ; all I at present ask is, that you will 

left him in a state of mind that claimed and check the thoughts that would lead you to a 

excited her tenderest compassion ; and being remembrance of the past ; that you will suffer 

more sensible than ever of the impropriety of your mind to be engaged by present objects ; 

remaining longer at the diateau, she imme- that you will allow yourself to believe it pos- 

diately sought the count, and communicated sible you may yet be happy ; and that you 

to him her intention of returning to the con- will sometimes think with complacency of 

vent. poor Du Pont, and not condemn him to the 

• My dear Emily,' said he, 'I observe with state of despondency, from which, my dear 

extreme concern the illusion you are encourag- Emily, I am endeavouring to withdraw you.' 

ing — an illusion common to young and sensi- 'Ah! my dear sir,' said Emily, while her 

ble minds, Yoiu" heart has received a severe tears still fell, ' do not suffer the benevolence 

shock ; you believe you can never entirely re- of your wishes to mislead Mons. du Pont with 

cover it ; and you will encourage this belief, an expectation that I can ever accept his hand, 

till the habit of indulging sorrow will subdue If I understand my own heart, this never can 

the strength of your mind, and discolour your be ; your instruction I can obey in almost 

future views with melancholy regret. Let me every other particular than that of adopting a 

dissipate this illusion, and awaken you to a contrary belief.' 

sense of your danger.' ' Leave me to understand your heart,' re- 
Emily smiled mournfully. ' I know what plied the count with a faint smile. ' If you pay 
you would say, my dear sir,' said she, 'and me the compliment to be guided by my advice 
am prepared to answer you. I feel that my in other instances, I will pardon your incredu- 
heart can never know a second affection; and lity respecting your future conduct towards 
that I must never hope even to recover its Mons. du Pont. I will not even press you to 
tranquillity — if I suffer myself to enter into a remain longer at the chateau than your own 
second engagement.' satisfaction will permit ; but though I forbear 
' I know that you feel all this,' replied the to oppose your present retirement, I shall 
count ; ' and I know also that time will over- urge the claims of friendship for your future 
come these feelings, unless you cherish them visits.' 

in solitude, and, pardon me, with romantic Tears of gratitude mingled with those of 
toidemess : — then, indeed, time will only con- tender r^^ret, while Emily thanked the count 
firm habit I am particularly empowered to for the many instances of friendship she had 
speak on this subject, and to sympathise in received from him ; promised to be directed 
your sidferings,' added the count with an air by his advice upon every subject but one ; and 
of solemnity, ' for I have known what it is to .assured him of the pleasure with which she 
love, and to lament the object of my love. Yes,' should, at some future period, accept the in- 
continued he, while his eyes filled with tears, vitation of the countess and himself — if Mons. 
' I have suffered ! — but those times have du Pont was not at the chateau, 
passed away — long passed 1 and I can now The count smiled at this condition. ' Be it 
look back upon them without emotion.' so,' said he : ' meanwhile the convent is so near 
. 'My dear sir,' said Emily timidly, 'what the chateau, that my daughter and I shall 
mean those tears ? — they speak, I fear, another often visit jrou ; and if, sometimes, we should 
language — they plead for me.' " dare to bring you another visitor — will you 

' They are weak tears, for they are useless forgive us ?* 

ones,' replied the count, drying them; 'Iwould Emily looked distressed, and remained 

have you superior to such weakness. These, silent. 

however, are only faint traces of a grief which, ' Well, 'rejoined the count, ' I will pursue the 

if it had not been opposed by long-continued subject no further, and must now entreat your 

effort, might have led me to the verge of mad- forgiveness for having pressed it thus far. You 

ness I Judge, then, whether I have not cause will, however, do mc the justice to believe that 

to warn you of an indulgence which may pro- I have been urged only by a sincere regard for 

duce so terrible an effect, and which must your happiness, and that of my amiable friend 

certainly, if not opposed, overcloud the years Mons. du Pont.' 

that might otherwise be happy. M. du Pont Emily, when she left the count, went to 

js a sensiBle and amiable man, who has long mention her intended departure to the count- 



ito 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDQLPHO. 



ess. who opposed h with polite expressions of 
legret ; af& which, , she sent a note to ac- 
quaint the lady abbess that she should return 
to the convent ; and thither she withdrew on 
the evening of the following day. M. du 
Pont, in extreme regret, saw her depart, while 
the count endeavoured to cheer him with a 
hope that Emily would some time regard him 
with a more favourable eye. 

She was pleased to find herself once more 
in the tranquil retirement of the convent, 
where she experienced a renewal of all the 
maternal kindness of the abbess, and of the 
sisterly attentions of the nuns. A report of 
the late extraordinanr occurrence at the chateau 
had already reached them ; and after supper, 
on the evening of her arrival, it was the sub- 
ject of conversation in the convent parlour, 
where she was requei<ed to mention some 
particulars of that tmaccountable event. 
Emily was guarded in her conversation on 
this subject, and briefly related a few circum- 
stances concerning Ludovico, whose disap- 
pearance, her auditors almost unanimously 
agreed, had been effected by supernatural 
means. 

A belief had so long prevailed, said a nun, 
who was called sister Frances, that the chateau 
was haunted, that I was surprised when I 
heard the count had the temerity to inhabit it. 
Its former possessor, I fear, had some deed of 
conscience to atone for : let us hope that the 
virtues of its present owner would preserve 
him from the punishment due to the errors of 
the last, if, indeed, he was criminal. 

'Of what crime then was he suspected?" 
said a Mademoiselle Feydeau, a boarder at the 
convent. 

' Let us pray for his soul 1' said a nun, who 
had till now sat in silent attention. ' If he 
was criminal, his punishment in this world 
was sufficient' 

There was a mixture of wildness and solem- 
nity in her manner of delivering this, which 
struck Emily exceedingly ; but Mademoiselle 
repeated her question, without noticing the 
solemn eagerness of the nun. 

' I dare not presume to say what was his 
crime,' replied sister Frances; 'but I have 
heard many reports of an extraordinary nature 
respecting the late Marquis de Villeroi, and 
among others, that soon after the death of 
his lady he quitted Chateau-le-Blanc, and 
never afterwards returned to it. I was not 
here at the time, so I can only mention it from 
report ; and so many years have passed since 
the marchioness died, that few of our sister- 
hood, I believe, can do more.' 

' Rut I crfn,' said the nun, who had before 
spoken, and whom they called sister Agnes. 

'You, then,' said Mademoiselle Feydeau, 

' arc possibly acquainted with circumstances 

tliat enable you to judge whether he was 

criminal or not, and what was the crime ini- 

piitud to Mm, ' 



' I am,' replied the nun ; ' bat who shall 
dare to scrutinize my thoughts — who shall 
dare to pluck out my opinion ? God only is 
his judge, and to that judge he is gone.' 

Emily looked with surprise at sister Frances, 
who returned her a significant glance. 

• I only requested your opinion,' said Made- 
moiselle Feydeau mildly ; ' if the subject is 
displeasing- to you, I will drop it.' 

' Displeasing I' said the nun with emphasis : 
— • we are idle talkers ; we do not weigh the 
meaning of the words we use ; displtasing is 
a poor word. I will go pray.' As she said 
this, she rose from her seat, and with a pro- 
found sigh quitted the room. 

•What can be the meaning of this?* said 
Emily, when she was gone. 

• It is nothing extraordinary,' replied sis- 
ter Framtes, • she is often thus : but she has 
no meaning in what she says. Her intellects 
are at times deranged. Did you never see her 
thus before?' 

• Never,' said Emily. • I have, indeed, 
sometimes thought that there was the melan- 
choly of madness in her look, but never before 
perceived it in her speech. Poor soul, I will 
pray for her !' 

' Yoiu- pra3rers then, my daughter, will unite 
with ours,' observed the lady abbess ; ' she has 
need of them.' 

' Dear lady,' said Mademoiselle Feydeau, 
addressing the abbess, • what is your opinion 
of the late marquis? The strange circum- 
stances that have occurred at the chateau have 
so awakened my curiosity, that I shall be par- 
doned the question. What was his imputed 
crime, and what the punishment to which 
sister Agnes alluded ?' 

•We must be cautious of advancing our 
opinion,' said the abbess with an air of re- 
serve mingled with solemnity — ' we must be 
cautious of advancing our opinion on so deli- 
cate a subject. I will not take upon me to 
pronounce that the late marquis was a crimi- 
nal, or to say what was the crime of which he 
was suspected ; but, concerning the punish- 
ment our daughter Agnes hint«i, I know of 
none he suffered. She probably alluded to 
the sfevsre one which an exasperated con- 
science can inflict. Beware, my children, of 
incurring so terrible a punishment — it is the 

furgatory of this life ! The late marchioness 
knew well ; she was a pattern to such as live 
in the world ; nay, our sacred order need 
not have blushed to copy her virtues. Our 
holy convent received her mortal part ; her 
heavenly spirit, I doubt not, ascended to its 
sanctuary ! 

As the abbess spoke this, the last bell of 
vespers struck up, and she rose. • Let us go, 
my children,' said she, ' and intercede for the 
wretched ; let us ^o and confess our sins, and 
endeavour to punfy our souls for the heaven 
to which she is gone !' 

^mily was affected by the solemnity of this 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 



tix 



exhortation, and remembering her father, 
' The heaven to which he too is gone 1' said 
she faintly, as she repressed her sighs, and 
followed Uie abbess and nuns to the chapel. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

' Be thou a spirit of ])ealth, or goblin danin'd. 
Bring with thee airs from heaven, or blasts from 

hell, 
Be thy intents wicked or charitable. 



I will speak to thee 



Hamlet. 



Count de Villefort at length received a 
letter fh>m the advocate at Avignon, encoiuv 
aging Emily to assert her claim to the estates 
fA the late Madame Montoni ; and about the 
same time a messenger arrived from the late 
M. Quesnel, with intelligence that made an 
appeal to the law on this subject unnecessary, 
since it appeared that the only person who 
could have opp>osed her claim was now no 
more. A friend of M. Quesnel, who resided 
at Venice, had sent him an account of the 
death of Montoni, who had been brought to 
trial with Orsino, as bis supposed accomplice 
in the murder of the Venetian nobleman. 
Orsino was found guilty, condemned and 
executed upon the wheel ; but nothing being 
discovered to criminate Montoni and his col- 
leagues on this charge, the^ were all released 
except Montoni, who, being considered by 
the senate as a very dangerous person, was, 
for other reasons, ordered again into confine- 
ment, where it was said he had died in a doubt- 
ful and mysterious manner, and not without sus- 
picion of having been poisoned. The autho- 
rity from which M. Quesnel had received this 
information would not allow him to doubt its 
truth ; and he told Emily, that she had now 
only to lay claim to the estates of her late 
aunt to secure them ; and added, that he 
would himself assist in the necessary forms of 
this business. The term for which La Valine 
had been let being now also nearly expired, 
he acquainted her with the circumstance, and 
advised her tO take the road thither through 
Thoulouse, where he promised to meet her, 
and where it would be proper for her to take 
possession of the estates of the late Madame 
Montoni ; adding that he would spare her any 
difficulties that might occur on that occasion 
from the want of knowledge on the subject, 
and that he believed it would be necessary for 
her to be at Thoulouse in about three weeks 
from the present time. 

An increase of fortune seemed to have 
awakened this sudden kindness in M. Quesnel 
towards his niece ; and it appeared that he 
entertained more respect for the rich heiress, 
than he had ever Jfelt compassion for the poor 
and unfriended orphan. 



The pleasure with which she received this 
intelligence was clouded when she considered 
that he, for whose sake she had once regretted 
the want of fortune, was no longer worthy of 
sharing it with her; but remembering the 
friendly admonition of the count, she checked 
this melancholy reflection, and endeavoured 
to feel only gratitude for the unexpected good 
that now attended her ; while it formed no 
inconsiderable part of her satisfactioixto know 
that La Vall^, her native home, which was en- 
deared to her by its having been the residence 
of her parents, would be restored to her pos- 
session. There she meant to fix her futiu*e 
residence ; for, though it could not be com- 
pared with the chateau at Thoulouse, either 
for extent or magnificence, its pleasant scenes, 
and the tender remembrances that haunted 
them, had claims upon her heart which she 
was not inclined to sacrifice to ostentation. 
She wrote immediately to thank M. Ques- 
nel for the active interest he took in her con- 
cerns, and to say that she would meet him at 
Thoulouse at the appointed time. 

When Count de Villefort, with Blanche, 
came to the convent to give Emily the advice 
of the advocate, he was informed of the con- 
tents of M. Quesnel's letter, and gave his 
sincere congratulations on the occasion ; but 
she observed, that when the first expression of 
satisfaction had faded from his countenance, 
an unusual gravity succeeded, and she scarcely 
hesitated to inquire its cause. 

' It has no new occasion,' replied the count ; 
' I am harassed and perplexed by the con- 
fusion into which my family is thrown by their 
foolish superstition. Idle reports are floating 
round me, which I can neither admit to be 
true nor prove to be false ; and I am also 
very anxious about the poor fellow Ludovico, 
concerning whom I have not been able to 
obtain information. Every part of the cha- 
teau, and every part of the neighbourhood 
too, has, I believe, been searched, and I 
know not what further can be done, since I 
have already offered large rewards for the re- 
covery of him. The keys of the north apart- 
ment I have, not suffered to be out of my 
possession since he disappeared, and I mean 
to watch in those chambers myself this very 
night.' 

ISmily, seriously alarmed for the count, 
.united her entreaties with, those of the Lady 
Blanche, to dissuade him from his purpose. 

' What should I fear?' said he. ' I have no 
fiaith in supernatural combats ; and for human 
opposition I shall be prepared; nay, I will 
even promise not to watch alone.' 

' But who, dear sir, will have courage enough 
to watch with you?' said Emily. 

• My son,' replied the count ' If I am not 
carried off in the night,' added he smiling, 
' you shall hear the result oi my adventure to- 
morrow.' 

The count and Lady Blanche shortly after- 



112 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



wards took lenve of Emily, and returned to 
the chateau, where he informed Henri of his 
intention, who, not without some secret re- 
luctance, consented to be the partner of his 
watch ; and when the design was mentioned 
after supper, the countess was terrified, and 
the baron and M. Du Pont joined with her in 
entreating that he would not tempt his fate as 
■ Ludovico had done. ' We know not,' added 
the baron, ' the nature or the power of an 
evil spirit ; and that such a spirit haunts those 
chambers can now, I think, scarcely be 
doubted. Beware, my lord, how you pro- 
voke his vengeance, since it has- already given 
us one terrible example of its malice. I allow 
it may be probable that the spirits of the dead 
are permitted to return to the earth only on 
occasions Of high import ; but the present im- 
port may be your destruction.' 

The count could not forbear smiling : * Do 
you think, then, baron,* said he, ' that my 
destruction is of sufficient importance to draw 
back to earth the soul of the departed ? Alas ! 
my good friend, there is no occasion for such 
means to accompUsh the destruction of any 
individual. Wherever the mystery rests, I 
trust I shall this night be able to detect it. ' 
You know I am not superstitious: ' 

' I know that you are incredulous,' inter- 
^cupted the baron. 

' Well, call it what you will ; I mean to say 
that, though you know I am free from super- 
stition, if anything supernatural has appeared, 
I doubt not it will appear to me ; and if any 
strange event hangs over my house, or if any 
extraordinary transaction has formerly been 
connected with it, I shall probably be made 
acquainted with it. At all events I will in- 
vite discovery ; and that I may be equal to a 
mortal attack, which in good truth, my friend, 
is what I most expect, I shall take care to be 
well armed.' 

The count took leave of his family for the 
night with an assumed gaiety, which but ill 
concealed the anxiety that depressed his spirits, 
and retired to the north apartments, accom- 
panied by his son, and followed by the baron, 
M. Du Pont, and some of the domestics, who 
all bade him good night at the outer door. 
In these chambers everything appeared as 
when he had last been here : even in the bed- 
room no alteration was visible, where he 
lighted his own fire, for none of the domestics 
could be prevailed upon to venture thither. 
After carefully examining the chamber and 
the oriel, the count and Henri drew their 
chairs upon the hearth, set a bottle of wine 
and a lamp before them, laid their swords 
upon the table, and, stirring the wood into a 
blaze, began to converse on indifferent topics. 
But Henri was often silent and abstracted, * 
and sometimes threw a glance of mingled awe 
and curiosity round the gloomy apartment ; 
while the count gradually ceased lo coiweise, 
and sat either lost in thought, or reading a 



volume of Tacitus, which he had brought to 
beguile the tediousness of the night. . 



CHAPTER XLVn. 

' Give thy thoughts no tongue.' 

Shakespeare. 

The Baron St. Foix, whom anxiety for his 
friend had kept awake, roSe early to inquire 
the event of the night ; when, as he passed 
the count's closet, hearing steps witlun, he 
knocke4 at the door, and it was opened. by 
his friend himself. Rejoicing to see him in 
safety, and curious to learn the occurrences of 
the night, he had not immediately leisure 
to observe the unusual gravity that over- 
spread the feature of the count, whose re- 
served answers first occasioned him to notice 
it. The count, then smiling, endeavoured to 
treat the subject of his curiosity with levity ; 
but the baron was serious, and pursued his 
inquiries so closely, that the count at length, 
resuming his gravity, said, ' Well, my friend, 
press the subject no further, I entreat you ; 
and let me request also that you will hereafter 
be silent upon any thing you may think 
extraordinary in my future conduct. I do not 
scruple to tell you that I am unhappy, and 
that the watch of the last night has not as- 
sisted me to discover Ludovico ; upon every 
occurrence of the night you must excuse my 
reserve.' 

' But where is Henri ?' said the baron with 
surprise and disappointment at this denial. 

' He is well, in his own apartment,' replied 
the count. * You will not question him on 
this topic, since you know my wish.' 

' Certainly not,' said the baron, somewhat 
chagrined, ' since it would be displeasing to 
you ; but methinks, my friend, you might 
rely on my discretion, and drop this unusual 
reserve. However, you must allow me to sus- 
pect that you have seen reason to become a 
convert to my system, and are no longer the 
incredulous knight you lately appeared to be.' 

' Let us talk no more upon the subject,' 
said the count : ' you may be assured that no 
ordinary circumstance has imposed this silence 
upon me, towards a friend whom I have called 
so for near thirty years ; and my present re- 
serve cannot make you question either my 
esteem, or the sincerity of my friendship.' 

' I will not doubt either,' said the baron, 

• though you must allow me to express my 
surprise at this silence.' 

• To me I will allow it,' replied the count ; 

* but I earnestly entreat that you will forbear 
to notice it to my family, as well as every 
thing remarkable you may observe in my con- 
duct towards them.' 

The baron readily promised this ; and after 
con\etslng for some time on general topics, 
X\v.e;^ d<&^c&u^e,^\!^ >^<& btQak£a,st-room, where 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. X13 

the count met his family with a cheerful coun- his conduct, that he do not forfeit his claim ! 
tcnance, and evaded their inquiries by em- Yet who is he that shall dare to call himself 
ploying light ridicule and assuming an air of innocent ? — all earthly innocence is but com- 
uncommon gaiety, while he assured them that parative. Yet still how wide asunder are the 
they need not apprehend anything from the extremes of guilt, and to what a horrible 

north chambers, since Henri and himself had depth may we fall ! Oh ! ' 

been permitted to return from them in safety. The nun, as she concluded, uttered a shud- 

Henri, however, was less successful in dis- dering sigh, that startled Emily, who looking 
guising his feelings. From his countenance up perceived the eyes of Agnes fixed on hers ; 
an expression of terror was not entirely faded ; after which the sister rose, took her hand, 
he was often silent and thoughtful ; and when gazed earnestly upon her countenance for some 
he attempted to laugh at the eager inquiries moments in silence, and then said — 
of Mademoiselle Beam, it was evidently only ' You are young — you are innocent ! I mean 
an attempt. you are yet innocent of any great crime I — 

In the evem'ng, the count called, as he had cut you have passions in yoiu* heart, — scor- 
promised, at the convent, and Emily was sur- pions : they sleeps now — beware how you 
prised to perceive a mixture of playful ridicule awaken them I — they will sting you, even 
and of reserve in his mention of the north apart- imto death I ' 

ment. Of what had occurred there, however, Emily, affected by these words, and by the 
he said nothing ; and when she ventured to solemnity with which they were delivered, 
remind him of his promise to tell her the result could not suppress her tears, 
of his inquiries, and to ask if he had received ' Ah ! is it so ?' exclaimed Agnes, her coun- 
any proof that those chambers were haunted, tenance softening from its sternness ; ' so 
his look became solemn for a moment : then, young, and so unfortunate I We are sisters, 
seeming to recollect himself, he smiled, and then, indeed. Yet there is no bond of kind- 
said, ' My dear Emily, do not suifer my lady ness among the guilty,' she added, while her 
abbess to infect your good understanding with eyes resumed their wild expression, ' no gentle- 
Uiese fancies : she will teach you to expect ness — no peace, no hope ! I knew them 
a ghost in every dark room.' ' But believe me,' all once — my eyes could weep>— but now they 
added he with a profound sigh, ' the ai> bum ; for now my soul is fixed land fearless I 
parition of the dead comes not on light or — I lament no more ! ' 

sportive errands, to terrify or to surprise the ' Rather let us repent and pray,' said another 
timid.' He paused, and fell into a momentary nun. 'We are taught to hope that prayer 
thoughtfulness, and then added, * We will and penitence will work our salvation. There 
say no more on this subject.' ' is hope for all who repent I' 

Soon after, he took leave ; and when Emily • Who repent and turn to the true faith,' 
joined some of the nuns, she was surprised to observed sister Frances, 
find them acquainted with a circimistance ' For all but me ! ' replied Agnes solemnly, 
which she had carefully avoided to mention, who paused, and then abruptly added, ' My 
and expressing their admiration of his intre- head bums ; I believe I am not well. O ! 
pidity in having dared to pass a night in the could I strike from my memory all former 
apartment whence Ludovico had disappeared ; scenes — the figures that rise up, like furies, to 
for she had not considered with what rapidity torment me ! — I see them when I sleep, and 
a tale of wonder circulates. The nuns had when I am awake : they are still before my 
acquired their information from peasants who eyes I I see them now — now I' 
brought fruit to the monastery, and whose She stood in a fixed attitude of horror, her 
whole attention had been fixed, since the dis- straining eyes moving slowly round the room, 
appearance of Ludovico, on what was passing as if they followed something. One of the 
in the castle. nuns gently took her hand, to lead her from 

Emily listened in silence to the various -the parlour. Agnes became calm, drew her 
opinions of the nuns concerning the conduct other hand* across her eyes, looked again, 

of the count, most of whom condemned it as and, sighing deeply, said, * They are gone 

rash and presumptuous, affirming that it was they are gone ! I am feverish, I know not 
provoking the vengeance of an evil spirit, what I say. I am thus sometimes, but it will 
thus to intmde upon its haunts. go off again ; I shall sodU be better — Was 

Sister Frances contended, that the count not that the vesper-bell ?' 
had acted with the bravery of a virtuous 'No,' replied Frances, ' the evening service 
mind. He knew himself guiltless of aught is passed. Let Margaret lead you to your cell. ' 
that should provoke a good spirit, and did not 'You are right,' replied sister Agnes, *I 
fear the speUs of an evil one, since he could shall be better there. Good night, my sisters ; 
claim the protection of a higher power ; of Him remember me in your orisons. ' 
who can command the wicked and will pro- When they had withdrawn, Frances, ob- 
tect the innocent.' serving Emily's emotions, said, 'Do not be 

• The guilty cannot claim that protection !' alarmed, our sister is often thus deranged, 
said sister Agnes. ' Let the count look to though I have not la.t&\?j ^«w!L\isa. ^'c»'«»si5NS5.\ 



114 



THE MYSTERIES OF VDOLPHO, 



her usual mood is melancholy. This fit has 
been coming on for several days ; seclusion 
and the customary treatment will restore her.' 

' But how rationally she conversed at first 1 ' 
observed Emily ; * her ideas followed each 
other in perfect order.' 

'Yes,' replied the nun, 'this is nothing 
new : nay, I have sometimes known her argue 
not only with method but with acuteness, and 
then in a moment start off into madness.' 

' Herconscience seems afflicted, said Emily ; 
• d^d you ever hear what circumstance re- 
duced her to this deplorable condition ?' 

' I have,' rej^ied the nun, who said no 
more till Emily repeated the question ; when 
she added in a low voice, and looking signifi- 
cantly towards the other boarders, ' I cannot 
tell you now ; but if you think it worth your 
while, come to my cell to night, when our 
sisterhood are at rest, and you shall hear more ; 
but remember we rise to midnight prayers, 
and come either before or after midnight.' 

Emily promised to remember ; and the 
abbess soon after appearing, they spoke no 
more of the unhappy nun. 

The count meanwhile, on his return home, 
had found M. Du Pont in one of those fits of 
despondency which his attachment to Emily 
frequently occasioned him, an attachment that 
had subsisted too long to be easily subdued, 
and which had already outlived the opposi- 
tion of his friends. M. Du Pont had first 
seen Emily in Gascony during the lifetime of 
his parent, who, on discovering his son's 
partiality for Mademoiselle St. Aubert, his 
inferior in point of fortune, forbade him to 
declare it to her family, or to think of her 
more. During the life of his father he had 
observed the first command, but had found it 
impracticable to obey the second, and had 
sometimes soothed his passion by visiting 
her favourite haunts, among which was 
the fishing-house, where, once or twice, he 
addressed her in verse, concealing his name 
in obedience to the promise he had given his 
father. There too he played the pathetic aiT to 
which she had hstened with such surprise and 
admiration ; and there he found the miniature 
that had since cherished a passion fatal to his 
repose. During this expedition into Italy, his 
father died ; but he received his liberty at a 
moment when he was the least enabled to 
profit by it, since the object that rendered it 
most valuable was no longer within the reach 
of his vows. By what accident he discovered 
Emily, and assisted to release her from a 
t^rible imprisonment, has already appeared, 
and also the unavailing hope with which he 
then encouraged his love, and the fruitless 
efforts that he had since made to overcome it. 

The count still endeavoured, with friendly 
zeal, to soothe him with a belief that patience, 
perseverance, and prudence, would finally 
obtain for him happiness and Emily. ' Time,' 
raid he, ' will wear away the melancholy im- 



pression which disappointment has left on hef 
mind, and she wiU be sensible of your merit. 
Your services have already awakened her 
gratitude, and your sufferings her pity ; and 
trust me, my friend, in a heart so sensible as 
hers, gratitude and pity lead to love. When 
her imagination is rescued from its present 
delusion, she will reacGIy accept the homage 
of a mind like yours.' 

Du Pont sighed while he listened to these 
wcM-ds ; and endeavouring to hope what his 
friend believed, he willingly yielded to an in- 
vitation to prolong his visit at the chateau, ; 
which we now leave for the monastery of St. 
Claire. 

When the nuns had retired to rest, Emily 
stole to her appointment with sister Frances, 
whom she found in her cell, engaged in ' 
prayer before a litde table, where appeared 
the image she was addressing, and, above, ' 
the dim lamp that gave hght to the place. 
Turning her eyes, as the door opened, she 
beckoned to Emily to come in, who, having 
done so, seated herself in silence beside the 
nun's little mattress of straw, till her orisons 
should conclude. The latter soon rose from 
-her knees; and taking down the l^np and 
placing it on the table, Emily perceived there 
a human skull and bones lying beside an 
hour-glass : but the nun, without observing 
her emotion, sat down on the mattress by her, 
saying, ' Your curiosity, sister, has made you 
punctual ; but you have nothing remarkable 
to hear in the history of poor Agnes, of whom 
I avoided to speak in the presence of my lay- 
sisters, only because I would not publish her 
crime to them. ' 

' I shall consider your confidence in me 
as a favour,' said Emily, ' and will not misuse 
if . 

' Sister Agnes,' resumed the nun, 'is of a 
noble family, as the dignity of her air must 
already have informed you ; but I will not 
dishonour their name so much as to reveal it. 
Love was the occasion of her crime and of 
her madness. She was beloved by a gentle- 
man of inferior fortune ; and her father, as I 
have heard, bestowing her on a nobleman 
whom she disliked, an ill-governed passion ' 
proved her destruction. Every obligation of 
virtue and of duty was forgotten, and she pro- 
faned her marriage-vows ; but her guilt was 
soon detected, and she would have fallen a 
sacrifice to the vengeance of her husband, . 
had not her father contrived to convey her 
from his power. By what means he did this, . 
I never could learn ; but he secreted her in 
this convent, where he afterwards prevailed : 
with her to take the veil, while a report was 
circulated in the world that she was dead ; 
and the father, to save his daughter, assisted 
the rumour, and employed such means as in- 
duced her husband to believe she had become 
a victim to his jealousy. You look surprised,' 
added the nun, observing Emily's coimten- 



TH^ MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, US 

ance ; ' I allow the story is uncommon, bnt but remained thoughtful for a few moments, 

not, I believe, without a parallel.' and then said, ' It was about that same period 

•Pray proceed,' said Emily, 'I am in- that the Marchioness de Villeroi expired.' 

terested.' ' That is an odd remark,' said Frances. 

'The story is already told,' resumed the Emily, recalled from her reverie, smiled, 
nun ; ' I have only to mention, that the long and gave the conversation another turn ; but 
struggle which Agnes suffered between love, it soon came back to the subject of the un- 
remorse, and a sense of the duties she had happy nun, and Emily remained in the cell of 
taken upon herself in becoming of our order, sister Frances till the midnight bell aroused 
at length unsettled her reason. At first she her ; when apologizing for having interrupted 
was frantic and melancholy by quick alter- the sister's repose till this late hour, they 
natives ; then she sunk into a deep and settled quitted the cell together. Emily returned to 
melancholy, which still, however, has at times her chamber, and the nun, bearing a glimmer- 
been interrupted bry fits of wildness, and of ing taper, went to her devotion in the chapel, 
late these have agam been frequent.' Several days followed, during which Emily 

Emily was affected by the history of the saw neither the count, nor any of his family ; 

sister, some parts of whose story brought to and when at length he appeared, she re- 

her remembrance that of the Marchioness de marked, Mrith concern, that his air was un- 

Villeroi, who had also been compelled by her usually disturbed. 

father to forsake the object of her affections, ' My spirits are harassed,' said he, in answer 

for a nobleman of his choice ; but, from what to her anxious inquiries, ' and I mean to 

Dorothee had related, there appeared no change my residence for a little while, an 

reason to suppose that she had escaped the experiment which I hope will restore my mind 

vengeance of a jealous husband, or to doubt to its usual tranquillity. My daughter and 

for ap moment the innocence of her conduct, myself will accompany the Baron St. Foix to 

But Emily, while she sighed over the misery his chateau. It lies in a valley of the Pyrenees 

of the nun, could not forbear shedding a few that opens towards Gascony, and I have been 

tears to the misfortunes of the marchioness ; thinking, Emily, that when you set out for 

and when she returned to the mention of La Vafe we may go part of the way to- 

sister Agnes, she asked Frances if she remem- gether ; it would be a satisfaction to me to 

bered her in her youth, and whether she was guard you towards your home.' 

then beautiful. She thanked the count for his friendly con- 

' I was not here at the time when she took sideration, and lamented that the necessity 

the vows,* replied Frances, 'which is so long for her going first to Thoulouse would render 

ago that few of the present sisterhood, I this pkm impracticable. ' But when you are 

believe, were witnesses of the ceremony ; nay, at the baron's residence,' she added, 'you 

even our lady mother did not then preside will be only a short journey from La Valine, 

over the convent ; but I can remember when ahd I think, sir, you will not leave the coun- 

sister Agnes was a very beautiful woman, try without visiting me ; it is unnecessary to 

She retains that air of high rank which always say with what pleasure I should receive yoii 

distinguished her, but her beauty, you must and the Lady Blanche.' 

perceive, is fled ; I can scarcely discover even ' I do not doubt it' replied the count, ' and 

a vestige of the loveliness that once animated I will not deny myself and Blanche the plea- 

her features.' sure of visiting you, if your affairs should 

' It is strange,' said Emily, * but there are allow you to be at La Vall^ about the time 

moments when her countenance has appeared when we can meet you there.' 

familiar to my memory ! You will think me When Emily said that she should hope to see 

fanciful ; and I think myself so, for I certainly the countess also, she was not sorry to learn 

never saw sister Agnes before I came to this that this lady was going, accompanied by 

convent, and I must therefore have seen Mademoiselle Beam, to pay a visit for a few 

some person whom she strongly resembles, weeks to a family in Lower Languedoc. 

though of this I have no recollection.' The count, after some further conversation 

' You have been interested by the deep on his intended journey and on the arrange- 

melancholy of her countenance,' said Frances, ment of Emily's, took leave ; and many days 

' and its impression has probably deluded did not succeed this visit before a second letter* 

your imagination ; for I might as reasonably from M. Quesnel informed her that he was 

think I perceive a likeness between you and then at Thoulouse, that La Valine was at 

Agnes, as you, that you have seen her any- liberty, and that he wished her to set off for 

where but in this convent, since this has been the former place, where he awaited her arrival 

her place of refuge for nearly as many years with all possible despatch, since his own afl&irs 

as make your age.' pressed him to return to Gascony. Emily 

' Indeed I' said Emily. did not hesitate to obey him ; and having 

• Yes,' rejoined B'rances; ' and why does that taken an affecting leave of the count's family, 

circumstance excite your surprise 7 in which M. du Pont was still included, and 

li^mily did not appear to notice this question, of her friends bX the convent, she set out for 



xz6 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



Thoulouse attended by the unhappy Annette* depressing fears had assailed her ; the very 
and guarded by a steady servant of the count words she had uttered, as she withdrew har 

last look from the prospect, came to her 

memory. 'Could I but be certain,' she had 

tiien said, ' that I should ever return, and that 
Valancourt would still live for me — I should 
go in peace !' 

Now, that futurity so anxiously anticipated 
was arrived : she was returned — but what 9, 
dreary blank appeared ! — Valancourt no longer 
lived for her ! She had no longer even the 
melancholy satisfaction of contemplating his 
Emily pursued her journey without any acci- image in her heart, for he was no longer the 
dent, along the plains of Languedoc towards same Valancourt she had cherished there — the 
the north-west; and on this her return to solace of many a mournful hour, the animating 
Thoulouse, which she had last left with friend that had enabled her to bear up against 
Madarfie Montoni, she thought much on the the oppression of Montoni— -the distant hope 
melancholy fate of her aunt, who but for her that had beamed over her gloomy prospect I 
own imprudence might now have been living On perceiving this beloved ideato be an illuaon 
in happiness there ! Montoni, too, often rose oi her own creation, Valancourt seemed to be 
to her fancy, such as she had seen him in his annihilated, and her soul sickened at the blank 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 

• Lull'd in the countless chAmbcrs of the brain. 
Our thoughts are Hnk'd bv many a hidden diain ; 
Awake but one, and lo, wtiat myriads rise 1 
Each stamps its image as the other flies. 

Pleasures of Memory/ 



days of triumph, bold, spirited, and com- 
manding ; such also as she had since beheld 
him in his days of vengeance ; and now, only 
a few short months had passed — ^and he had no 
longer the power or the will to afflict ; — he 
had become a clod of earth, and his life was 



that remained. His marriage with a rival, 
even his death, she thought she could have 
endured with more fortitude than this dis- 
covery ; for then, amidst all her grief* she 
could have looked in secret upon the image 
of goodness which her fancy bad drawn of 



vanished like a shadow ! Emily could have hini, and comfort would have mingled with 
wept at his fate, had she not remembered his ^^^ suffering ! » 

Drying her tears, she looked once more 
upon the landscape which had excited them, 
and perceived that she was passing the very 
bank where she had taken leave of Valancourt 
on the morning of her departure from Thou- 
louse ! and she now saw him through her 
scenes of her early love, and considered that returning tears, such as he had appeared when 



crimes ; for that of her unfortunate aunt she 
did weep ; and all sense of her errors was 
overcome by the recollection of her misfor- 
tunes. 

Other thoughts and other emotions suc- 
ceeded as Emily drew near the well-known 



Valancourt was lost to her and to himself for 
ever. At length she came to the brow of the 
hill, whence, on her departure for Italy, she 
had given a farewell look to this beloved 
landscape, amongst whose woods and fields 



she looked from the carriage to give him a last 
adieu — saw him leaning moiunfully against 
the high trees, and remembered the fixed 
look of mingled tenderness and anguish with 
which he had then regarded her. This recd- 



she had so often walked with Valancourt, and lection was too much for her heart, and she 
where he was then to inhabit, when she would sank back in the carriage, nor once looked up 



be far, far away ! . She saw, once more, that 
chain of the Pyrenees which overlooked La 
Vallee, rising like faint clouds on the horizon. 
'There, too, is Gascony extended at their 
feet !' said she. ' O my father — my mother ! 



till it stopped at the gates of what was now 
her own mansion. 

These being opened, and by the servant to 
whose care the chateau had been intrusted, 
the carriage drove into the court, where 



And there too is the Garonne I' she added, alighting, she hastily passed through the great 

drying the tears that obscured her sight — hall, now silent and solitary, to a large oak 

' and Thoulouse, and my aunt's mansion — parlour, the common sitting-room of the late 

and the groves in her garden !—0 my friends ! Madame Montoni ; where, mstead of being 

are yc all lost to me ! — must I never, never see received by M. Quesnel, she found a letter 

you more ?' Tears rushed again to her eyes, from him, informing hfer that business of con- 

and she continued to weep, till an abrupt sequence had obliged him to leave Thoulouse 

turn in the road had nearly occasioned the two days before. Emily was, upon the whole, 

carriage to overset, when, looking up, she not sorry to be spared his presence, since his 

perceived another part of the well-known abrupt departure appeared to indicate the 

scene around Thoulouse ; and all the reflec- same indifference with which he had formerly 

tions and anticipations which she had suffered regarded her. This letter infomned her, also, 

at the moment when she bade it last adieu, of the progress he had made in the settlement 

came with recollected force to her heart. She of her affairs ; and concluded writh directions 

remembered how anxiously she had \oo\R.c:d cotvcerning the forms of some business which 

forward into futurity, which was lo decide Yv« Tewva:\Tv^d\at>wat Va vtaxvsact. But "M. Ques* 

happiness concerning V^ianoourt, axxd vf\fflX tv^\^ >w2iML\vd\:^,^'s& ^^ xlq\. Vs\»|^ <^r93^\ her 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. Jtj 

thoughts, which returned to the remenabrance and among other concerns she employed 

of the persons she had been accustomed to means to learn the situation of all her poor 

see in this mansion, and chiefly of the ill- tenants, that she might relieve their wants, or 

guided and unfortunate Madame Montoni. confirm their comforts. 
In the room where she now sat, she had break- In the evening, her spirits were so much 

fasted with her on the morning of their depar- strengthened that she thought she could 

ture for Italy ; and the view of it brought bear to visit the gardens where she had so 

most forcibly to her recollection all she had often walked with Valancourt, and knowing 

herself suffered at that time, and the many that if she delayed to do so their scenes 

gay expectations which her aunt had formed would only affect her the more whenever they 

respecting the journey before her. While should be viewed, she took advantage of the 

Emily's mind was thus engaged, her eyes present state of her mind, and entered them, 
wandered unconsciously to a large window Passing hastily the gate leading from the 

that looked upon the garden, and here new court into the gardens, she hurried up the 

memorials of the past spoke to her heart ; for great avenue, scarcely permitting her memory 

she saw extended before her the very avenue to dwell for a moment on the circumstance of 

in which she had parted with Valancourt on her having here parted with Valancourt. and 

the eve of her journey ; and all the anxiety, soon quitted this for other walks less interest- 

the tender interest he had shown concerning ing to her heart. These brought her at length 

her future happiness, his earnest remonstrances to the flight of steps that led from the lower 

against her committing herself to the power of garden to the terrace, on seeing which, she 

Montoni, and the tru3i of his affection, came became agitated, and hesitated whether to 

afresh to her memory. At this moment it ascend ; but, her resolution returning, she 

appeared almost impossible that Valancourt proceeded. 

could have become unworthy of her regard : ' Ah !' said Emily as she ascended, ' these 

and she doubted all that she had lately heard are the same high trees that used to wave 

to his disadvantage, and even his own words, over the terrace, and these the same flowery 

which had con&-med Count de ViUefort's thickets — the laburnum, the wild rose, and the 

report of him. Overcome by the recoUec- cerinthe — which wore wont to grow beneath 

tions which the view of this avenue occa- them ! Ah ! and there too, on that bank are 

sioned, she turned abruptly from the window, the very plants which Valancourt so carefully 

and sunk into a chair beside it, where she sat, reared ! — O when last I saw them ! — She 

given up to grief, till the entrance of Annette checked the thought, but could not restrain 

with coffee aroused her. her tears ; and after walking slowlv on for a 

' Dear madam, how melancholy this place few moments, her agitation upon the view of 

looks now,' said Annette, ' to what it used to this well-known scene increased so much, that 

do ! It is dismal coming home, when there is she was obliged to stop, and lean upon the 

nobody to welcome one !' wall of the terrace. It was a mild and beautiful 

This was not the moment in which Emily evening. The sun was setting over the exten- 
could bear the remark ; her tears fell again ; sive landscape, to which his beams, sloping 
and as soon as she had taken the coffee she from beneath a dark cloud that overhung the 
retired to her apartment, where she endea- west, gave rich and partial colouring, and 
vbiured to repose her fatigued spirits. But touched the tufted summits of the groves that 
busy memory would still supply her with the rose from the garden below with a yellow 
visions of former times : she saw Valancourt gleam. Emily and Valancourt had often ad- 
interesting and benevolent, as he had been mired together this scene at the same hour ; 
wont to appear in the days of their early love, and it was exactly on this spot that, on the 
and amidst the scenes where she had believed night preceding her departure for Italy, she 
that they should some time pass their years had listened to his remonstrances against the 
together ! — but at length sleep closed these journey, and to the pleadings of passionate 
afflicting scenes from her view. affection. Some observations which she made 

On the following morning serious occupa- on the landscape brought this to her remem- 

tion recovered her from such melancholy brance, and with it all the minute particulars of 

reflections. ; for, being desirous of quitting that conversation ; the alarming doubts he had 

Thoulouse, and of hastening on to La Valltie, expressed concerning Montoni, doubts which 

she made some inquiries into the condition of had since been fatally confirmed ; the reasons 

the estate, and immediately dispatched a part and entreaties he had employed to prevail with 

of the necessary business concerning it, accord- her to consent to an immediate marriage ; the 

ing to the directions of Monsieur Quesnel. tenderness of his love, the paroxysms of his 

It required a strong effort to abstract her grief, and the conviction he had repeatedly 

thoughts from other interests sufficiently to expressed, that they should never meet again 

attend to this ; but she was rewarded for her in happiness ! All these circumstances rose 

exertions by again experiencing that employ- afresh to her mind, and awakened the various 

ment is the surest antidote to sorrow. emotions she had then suffered. Her tender- 

Thi3 day wajs devote^ entirely to business ; ness for Valancourt became as powerful as i^ 



TiS 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



the moments when she thought that she was 
parting with him and happiness together, and 
when the strength of her mind had enabled 
her to triumph over present suffering rather 
than to deserve the reproach of her conscience 
by engaging in a clandestine marriage. — 
* Alas !' said Emily, as these recollections came 
to her mind, ' and what have I gained by the 
fortitude I then practised?— am I happy 
now? — He said, we should meet no more in 
happiness ; but, O ! he little thought his own 
misconduct would separate us, and lead to the 
stxy evil he then dreaded !' 

Her reflections increased her anguish, while 
she was compelled to acknowledge that the 
fortitude she had formerly exerted, if it had 
not conducted her to happiness, had saved her 
from irretrievable misfortune, from Valancourt 
himself! But in these moments she could 
not congratulate herself on the prudence that 
had saved her ; she could only lament, with 
bitterest anguish, the circumstances which 
had conspired to betray Valancoiut into a 
course of life so different from that which the 
virtues, the tastes, and the pursuits of his early 
years had promised ; but she still loved him 
too well to believe that his heart was even now 
depraved, though his conduct had been cri- 
minal. An observation which had fallen from 
M. St. Aubert more than once, now recurred 
to her. ' This young man, 'said he, speaking 
of Valancoiu-t, ' has never been at Paris :' a 
remark that had surprised her at the time it 
was uttered, but which she now understood : 
and she exclaimed sorrowfully, * O Valan- 
court 1 if such a friend as my father had been 
with you at Paris — ^yoiu- noble, ingenuous 
nature would not have fallen 1* 

The sun was now set ; and recalling her 
thoughts from their melancholy subject, she 
continued her walk ; for the pensive shade of 
twilight was pleasing to her, and the nightin- 
gales from the surrounding groves began to 
answer each other in the long-drawn plaintive 
note which always touched her heart ; while 
all the fragrance of the flowery thickets that 
bounded the terrace, was awakened by the 
cool evening air, which floated so lighUy 
among their leaves, that they scarcely trem- 
bled as it passed. 

Emily came at length to the steps of the 
pavilion that terminated the terrace, and 
where her last interview with Valancourt, be- 
fore her departure from Thoulouse, had so 
unexpectedly taken place. The door was now 
shut, and she trembled while she hesitated 
whether to open it ; but her wish to see again 
a place which had been the chief scene of her 
former happiness, at length overcoming her 
reluctance to encounter 3ie painful regret it 
would renew, she entered. The room was 
obscured by a melancholy shade ; but through 
the open lattices, darkened by the hanging 
foliage of the vines, appeared the dusky land- 
ficape, the Garonne reflecting^ the evening 



light, and the west still glowing. A chair was 
p&ced near one of the balconies, as if some 
persons had been sitting there ; but the other 
furniture of the pavilion remained exactly as 
usual, and Emily thought it looked as if it 
had not once been moved since she set out for 
Italy. The silent and deserted air of the 
place added solemnity to her emotions ; for 
she heard only the low whisper of the breeze 
as it shook the leaves of the vines, and the very 
faint murmur of the Garonne. 

She seated herself in a chair near the lattice, 
and 3rielded to the sadness of her heart, while 
she recollected the circumstances of her part- 
ing interview with Valancourt on this spot. It 
was here, too, that she had passed some of the 
happiest hours of her life with him, when her 
aunt favoured the connexion ; for here she Imd 
often sat and worked, while he conversed or 
read ; and she now well remembered with 
what discriminating judgment, with what 
tempered energy, he used to repeat some of 
the sublimest passages of their favourite 
authors ; how often he would pause to admire 
with her their excellence, and with what ten- 
der delight he would listen to her remarks, and 
correct her taste. 

'And is it possible,' said Emily, as these 
recollections returned — ' is it possible that a 
mind so susceptible of whatever is grand or 
beautiful, could stoop to low pursuits, and be 
subdued by frivolous temptations?' 

She remembered how often she had seen 
the sudden tear start in his eye, and had heard 
his voice tremble with emotion, while he re- 
lated any great or benevolent action, or re- 
peated a sentiment of the same character. 
• And such a mind,' said she, ' sudi a heart, 
were to be sacrificed to the habits of a great 
city!' 

These recollections becommg too painful to 
be endured, she abruptly left the pavilion, 
and, anxious to escape from the memorials of 
her departed happiness, returned towards the 
chateau. As she passed along the terrace, she 
perceived a person walking with a slow step 
and a dejected air, under the trees, at some 
distance. The twilight, which was now deep, 
would not allow her to distinguish who it was, 
and she imagined it to be one of the servants, 
till the sound of her steps seeming to reach 
him, he turned half round, and she thought 
she saw Valancourt ! 

Whoever it was, he instantly strudc among 
the thickets on the left, and disappeared ; 
while Emily, her eyes fixed on the place 
whence he had vanished, and her frame trem- 
bling so excessively that she could scarcely 
support herself, remained for some moments 
unable to quit the spot, and scarcely conscious 
of existence. With her recollection her 
strength returned, and she hurried towards 
the house, where she did not venture to in- 
quire who had been in the gardens, lest she 
should betray her emotion ; and she sat dQ>vo 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



119 



alone, endeavouring to recollect the figure, air, 
and featiu'es, of the person she had just seen. 
Her view of him, however, had been so tran- 
sient, and the gloom bad rendered it so imper- 
fect, that she could remember nothing with 
exactness ; yet the genera) appearance of his 
figure, and his abrupt departure, made her 
still believe that this person was Valancourt 
Sometimes, indeed, she thought that her fancy, 
which had been occupied by the* idea of him, 
had suggested his image to her uncertain 
sight I but this conjecture was fleeting. If it 
was himself whom she had seen, she wondered 
much that he should be at Thoulouse, and 
more, how he had gained admittance into the 
garden : but as often as her impatience 
prompted her to inquire whether any stranger 
had been admitted, she was restrained by an 
unwillingness to betray her doubts ; and the 
evoiing was passed in anxious conjecture, and 
in efforts to dismiss the subject from her 
thoughts. But these endeavours were in- 
effectual ; and a thousand inconsistent emo- 
tions assailed her, whenever she fancied that 
Valancourt might be near her : now she 
dreaded it to be true, aud now she feared it to 
be false ; and while she constantly tried to 
persuade herself that she wished the person 
whom she had seen might not be Valancourt, 
her heart as constantly contradicted her 
reason. 

The following day was occupied by the 
visits of several neighbouring families, for- 
merly intimate with Madame Montoni, who 
came to condole with Emily on her death, to 
congratulate her upon the acquisition of thes^ 
estates, and to inquire about Montoni, and 
concerning the strange reports they had heard 
of her own situation ; ail which was done with 
the utmost decorum, and the visitors departed 
with as much composure as they had arrived. 

Emily was wearied by these formalities, and 
disgusted by the subservient manners of many 
persons, who had thought her scarcely worthy 
of common attention while she was believed to 
be a dependant on Madame Montoni 1 

' Surely.' said she, ' there is some magic in 
wealth, which can thus make persons pay 
their court to it. when it does not even benefit 
themselves. How strange it is that a fool or 
a knave, with riches, should be treated with 
more respect by the world, than a good man 
or a wise man in poverty !' 

It was evening before she was left alone, and 
she then wished to have refreshed her spirits 
in the free air of her garden ; but she feared 
to go thither, lest she should meet again the 
person whom she had seen on the preced- 
ing night, and he should prove to be Valan- 
court. The suspense and anxiety she suffered 
on this subject, she found all her efforts tm- 
able to control ; and her secret wish to see 
Valancourt once more, though unseen by him. 
powerfully prompted her to go : but prudence 
and a delicate pride restrained her ; and she 



determined to avoid the possibility of throw- 
ing herself in his way, by forbearing to visit 
the gardens for several days, 

When, after near a week, she again ven- 
tured thither, she made Annette her com- 
panion, and confined her walk to the lower 
grounds ; but often started as the leaves 
rustled in the breeze, imagining that some 
person was among the thickets ; and at the 
turn of every alley she looked forward with 
apprehensive expectation. She piu-sued her 
walk thoughtfully and silently ; for her agita- 
tion would not suffer her to converse with An- 
nette, to whom, however, thought and silence 
were so intolerable that she did not scruple at 
length to talk to her mistress. 

'Dear madam.' said she, 'why do you 
start so? one would think you knew what has 
happened. ' 

'What has happened?* said, Emily in a 
faltering voice, and trying to command her 
emotion. 

' The night before last, you know, madam — ' 

' I know nothing, Annette,' replied her lady 
in a more hurried voice. 

' The night before last, madam, there was a 
robber in Ae garden.' 

' A robber 1' said Emily, in an eager yet 
doubting tone. 

• I suppose he was a robber, madam — what 
else coiiid he be ?* 

' Where did you see him, Annette ?' rejoined 
Emily, looking round her, and turning back 
towards the chateau. 

' ' It was not I that saw him, madam : it was 
Jean, the gardener. It was twelve o'clock at 
night ; and as he was coming across the cotut 
to go the back way into the house, what 
should he see but somebody walking in the 
avenue that fronts the garden-gate 1 So, wiUi 
that, Jean guessed how it was, and he went 
into the house for his gim.' 

' His gun !' exclaimed Emily. 

' Yes, madam, his gim ; and then he came 
out into the court to watch him. Presently he 
sees him come slowly down the avenue, and 
lean over the garden-gate, and look up at the 
house for a long time ; and I warrant he ex- 
amined it well, and settled what window he 
should break in at.' 

• But the gim,' said Emily — * the gun !' 

' Yes, madam, all in good time. Presently, 
Jean says, the robber opened the gate, and 
was coming into the court, and then he 
thought proper to ask him his business : so he 
tailed out again, and bade him say who he 
was, and what he wanted. But the man 
would do neither ; but turned upon his heel, 
and passed into the garden again. Jean knew 
then well enough how it was, and so he fired 
after him.' 

' Fired !' exclaimed Emily. 

• Yes, madam, fired off his gun ; but. Holy 
Virgin ! what makes you look so pale, madam? 
The man was not lolled,— I dare say ; but if 



X2d 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



thought I should never see you again in this 
world, when I heard you was gone to that 
outlandish country. I have been hardly used 
since you went ; I little thought thev would 
have turned me out of my old master s family 
in my old age i' 

Emilv lamented the circumstance, and then 
assured her that she would make her latter 
days comfortable, and expressed satisfaction 
on seeing her in so pleasant a habitation. 

Theresa thanked her* with tears, adding, 

* Yes, mademoiselle, it is a very comfortable 
home, thanks to the kind friend who took me 
out of my distress when you was too far off to 
help me, and placed me here ! I little thought ; 
^but no more of that — ' 

' And who was this kind friend f said Emily ; 
'whoever it was, I shall .consider him as mine 
also.' 

' Ah ! mademoiselle I that friend forbade me 
to blazon the good deed — I must not say >yho 
it was. But how you are altered since I saw 
you last ! You look so pale now, and so thin, 
too ; but then there is my old master's smile. 
Yes, that will never leave you any more than 
the goodness that used to make him smile. 
Alas-a-day I the poor lost a friend indeed 
when he died ! 

Emily was affected by this mention of her 
father, which Theresa observing, changed the 
subject ' I heard, mademoiselle,' said she, 
' that Madam Cheron married a foreign gentle- 
man, after all, and took you abroad ; how does 
she do ?' 

Emily now mentioned her death. * Alas !' 
said Theresa, ' if she had not been ray master's 
sister, I should never have loved her; she 
was always so cross. But how does that dear 
young gentleman do, M. Valancourt ? he was 
a handsome youth, and a good one; is he 
well, mademoiselle?' 

Emily was much agitated. 

* A blessing on him 1' continued Theresa. 

• Ah, my dear young lady, you need not look 
so shy ; I know all about it. Do you think I 
do not know that he loves you ? Why, when 
you was away, mademoiselle, he used to come 
to the chateau and walk about it so discon- 
solate ! He would go into every room in the 
lower part of the house, and sometimes he 
would sit himself down in a chair, with his 
arms across, and his eyes on the floor, and 
there he would sit and think, and think, for 
the hour together. He used to be very fond 
of the south parlour, because I told him it 
used to be yours ; and there he would stay, 
looking at the pictures which I said you drew, 
and plaving upon your lute that hung up by 
the window, and reading in your books till 
sunset ; and tiien he mijist go back to^ his 
brother's chateau. And then — r' 

' It is enough, Theresa," said Emily. * Mow 
long have you lived in this bottage — and how 
oan I serve you? Will you remain here, or 
return and live with me ?* 



' Nay, ma'amsdle !' said Theresa, • do not 
be so ^y to your poor old servant : I am sure 
it is no disgrace to like such a good , young 
gentleman.' 

A deep sigh escaped from Emily. 

• Ah ! how he did love to talk of you ! I 
loved him for that. Nay, for that matter, he 
liked to hear me talk, for he did not say much 
himself. But I soon found out what he came 
to the chateau about. Then he would go 
into the garden, and down to the terrace, and 
sit under that great tree there for the day to- 
gether with one of your books in his hand ; 
but he did not read much, I fancy ; for one 
day I happened to go that way, and I heard 
somebody talking. Who can be here ? says 
I : I am sure I let nobody into the garden but 
the chevalier. So I walked sofdy to see who 
it could be ; and behold ! it was the chevalier 
himself, talking to himself about you, And 
he repeated your name, and sighed so ! and 
said ne had lost you for ever, for that yon 
would never return for him. I thought he 
was out of his reckoning there; but I said 
nothing, and stole away.' 

•No more of this trifling,* said Emily, 
awakening from her reverie ; ' it displeases me.' 

• But when M. Quesnel let the chateau, I 
thougnt it would have broken the chev^er's 
heart.' 

' Theresa,' said Emily seriously, * you must 
name the chevalier no more !' 

' Not name him, mademoiselle 1' cried 
Theresa: 'what times are come up now? 
Why I love the chevalier next to my old 
master and you, mademoiselle.' 

' Perhaps your love was not well bestowed, 
then,' replied Emily, tr3ring to conceal her 
tears ; ' but, however that might be, we shall 
meet no more. ' 

' Meet no more ! — not well bestowed I' ex- 
claimed Theresa. ' What do I hear? No, 
mademoiselle, my love was well bestowed, for 
it was the Chevalier Valancourt who gave me 
this cottage, and has supported me in my old 
age ever since M. Quesnel turned me from 
my master's house.'. 

• The Chevalier Valancourt !' Said Emily, 
trembling extremely. 

• Yes, mademoiselle, he himself, though he 
made me promise not to tell ; biit how could 
one help, when one heard him ill spdketi of? 
Ah ! dear young lady, yoii may well weep if 
you have behaved unkindly to him, for a more 
tender heart than his never young gentleman 
had. He found me out in my distress, when 
you was too far off to help me ; and M. Ques- 
nel refused to do so, and bade meg^o to ser- 
vice again. Afes ! I was too old for that ! — 
The chevalier found me, and bon^fht me this 
cottage, and gave me rtioney to furnish it, and 
bade me seek put another poor woiftan to live 
with me ; and hfe ordered his brother's ste>;^urd 
to pay me every quarter that which has sup- 
ported ine ill cctowrt. Thifik, then, toadtetaoi- 



THE MySTBHtES OP UDOLPtiO. 



*4i 



selle, whether I have not reason to speak well 
of the chevalier. And there are others who 
could have afforded it better than he ; and I 
am afraid he has hurt himself by his generosity, 
for quarter-day has gone by long since, and 
no money for me ! But do not weep so, ma- 
demoiselle ; you are not sorry surely to hear 
of the poor dievalier's goodness ?* 

' Sorry l' said Emily, and wept the more. 
' But how l(Hig is it since you have seen him?' 

' Not this many a day, mademoiselle.' 

'When did you hear of him?* inquired 
Emily with increased emotion. 

' .AJas ! never since he went away so sud- 
denly into Languedoc ; and he was but just 
come from Paris then, or I should have seen 
him I am sure. Quarter-day is gone by long 
since, and, as I said, no money for me ; and I 
begin to fear some harm has happened to him ; 
and if I was not so far from Estuviere and so 
lame, I should have gone to inquire before 
this time ; and I have nobody to send so far.' 

Emily's anxiety as to the fate of Valancourt 
was now scarcely endurable ; and, since pro- 
priety would not suffer her to send to the cha- 
teau of his brother, she requested that Theresa 
would immediately hire some person to go to 
his steward from herself ; and when he asked 
for the quarterage due to her, to make in- 
quiries concerning Valancourt. But she first 
made Theresa promise never to mention her 
name in this a^ir, nor ever with that of the 
Chevalier Valancourt ; and her former faith- 
fulness to M. St. Aubert induced Emily to 
confide in her assurances. Theresa now joy- 
fully undertook to procure a person for this 
errand ; and then Emily, after giving her a 
sum of money to supply her with present 
comforts, returned with spirits heavily op- 
pressed to her home, lamenting more than 
ever, tha^a heart possessed of so much bene- 
volence as Valancourt's should have been con- 
taminated by the \ices of the world, but 
affected by the delicate affection which his 
kindness to her old servant expressed for 
herself. 



CHAPTER L. 

' Light thickens, and the crow 

Makes wing to the rocky wood : 
Good things of day begin to droop, and drowse, 
While night's Uack agents to their preys do rouse.' 

Macbeth. 

Meanwhile Count de Villefort and Lady 
Blanche had passed a pleasant fortnight at 
the chateau de St. Foix with the baron and 
baroness, during which they made frequent 
excursions amon^ the mountains, and were 
delighted with the romantic wildness of Py- 
renean scenery. It was with regret that toe 



count bade adieu to his old friends, although 
with the hope of being soon united with them 
in one family ; for it was setticd that M. St, 
Foix. who now attended them into Gascony, 
should receive the hand of the Lady Blanche 
upon their arrival at Chateau-le-Blanc. As 
tile road from the baron's residence to La 
Valine was over some of the wildest tracts of 
the Pyrenees, and where a carriage-wheel had 
never passed, the count hired mules for him- 
self and his family, as well as a couple of 
stout guides, who were well armed, informed 
of all the passes of the mountains, and who 
boasted too that they were acquainted with 
every brake and dingle in the way, could tell 
the names of all the highest points of this 
chain of Alps, knew every forest that spread 
along their narrow valleys, the shallowest part 
of every torrent they must cross, and the 
exact distance of every goatherd's and hun- 
ter's cabin they should have occasion to pass 
— which last article of learning required no 
very capacious memory, for such simple in- 
habitants were but thinly scattered over these 
wilds. 

The count left the Chateau de St Foix 
early in the morning, with an intention of 
passing the night at a little inn upon the 
mountains, about half-way to La Vall^, of 
which his guides had informed him ; and 
though this was frequented chiefly by Spanish 
muleteers on their route into France, and of 
course would afford only sorry accommoda- 
tion, the count had no alternative, for it was 
the only place like an inn on the road. 

After a day of admiration and fatigue, the 
travellers found themselves, about sunset, in a 
woody valley overlooked on every side by 
abrupt heights. They had proceeded for 
many leagues without seeing a human habi- 
tation, and had only heard now and then at a 
distance the melancholy tinkling of a sheep- 
bell : but now they caught the notes of merry 
music, and presentiy saw within a littie green 
recess among the rocks a group of moun- 
taineers tripping through a dance. The 
count, who could not look upon the happiness 
any more than on the misery of others with 
indifference, halted to enjoy this scene of 
simple pleasure. The group before him con- 
sisted of French and Spanish peasants, the 
inhabitants of a neighbouring hamlet, some 
of whom were performing a sprightly dance, 
the women with castanets in their hands, to 
the sounds of a lute and tamborine. till, from 
the brisk melody of France, the music softened 
into a slow movement, to which two female 
peasants danced a Spanish Pavan. 

The count, comparing this with the scenes 
of such gaiety as he had witnessed at Paris, 
where &&e taste painted the features, and, 
while it vainly tried to supply the glow of 
nature; conoeaied the charms of animation— 
where affectation so often distorted the air, 
and vice perverted* the maimecB^-si^ed'to 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPMO. 



X24 

think that natural graces and innocent plea- 
siires flourished in the wilds of solitude, while 
they drooped amidst the concourse of polished 
society. But the lengthening shadows reminded 
the travellers that they had no time to lose ; 
and leaving the joyous group, thfey pursued 
their way towards the httle inn which was to 
shelter them from the night. 

The rays of the setting sun now threw a 
yellow gleam upon the forests of pine and 
chestnut that swept down the lower region of 
the mountains, and gave resplendent tints to 
the snowy points above. But soon even this 
light faded fast, and the scenery assumed a 
more tremendous appearance, invested with 
the obscurity of twilight. Where the torrent 
had been seen, it was now only heard ; .where 
the wild cliffs had displayed every variety of 
form and attitude, a dark mass of mountains 
now alone appeared ; and the vale, which far 
far below had opened its dreadful chasm, the 
eye could no longer fathom. A melancholy 
gleam still lingered on the summits of the 
highest Alps, overlooking the deep repose of 
evening, and seeming to make the stillness of 
the hour more awful. 

Blanche viewed the scene in silence, and 
listened with enthusiasm to the murmur of the 
pines that extended in dark lines along the 
mountains, and to the faint voice of the izard 
among the rocks, that came at intervals on the 
air. But her enthusiasm sunk into apprehension , 
when, as the shadows deepened, she looked 
upon the doubtful precipice that bordered 
the road, as well as on the various fantastic 
forms of danger that gHmmered through* the 
obscurity beyond it ; and she asked her father 
how far they were from the inn, and whether 
he did not conceive the road to be dangerous 
at this late hour. The count repeated the 
first question to the guides, who returned a 
doubtful answer, adding, that when it was 
darker, it would Idc safest to rest till the moon 
rose. ' It is scarcely safe to proceed now,' 
said the count ; but the guides, assuring him 
that there was no danger, went on. Blanche, 
revived by this assurance, again indulged a 
pensive pleasure as she watched the progress 
of twilight gradually spreading its tints over 
the woods and mountains, and steahng from 
the eye every minuter feature of the scene, till 
the grand outlines of nature alone remained. 
I'hen fell the silent dews ; and every wild 
flower and aromatic plant that bloomed among 
the cliffs, breathed forth its sweetness ; then, 
too, when the mountain-bee had crept into 
its blossomed bed, and the hum of every httle 
insect that had floated gaily in the sunbeam 
was hushed, the sound of many streams, not 
heard till now, murmured at a distance. — 
The bats alone, of all the animals inhabiting 
this region, seemed awake ; and while they 
flitted across the silent path which Blanche 
was pursuing, she remembered the following 
Uaes wbicb Enuiy had given her : 



TO THE BAT*. 

* From haunt of man, from day's obtrusive glai**. 
Thou shroud'st thee in the ruin's ivied tower. 
Or in some shadowy glen's romantic bower. 
Where wizard forms their mystic charms prepare. 
Where horror lurks, and ever-boding care- 
But, at the sweet and silent evening hour. 
When closed in sleep is every languid flower. 
Thou lovest to sport upon the twilight air. 
Mocking the eye that would thy coiurse pursue. 
In many a wanton round ; elastici gay, 
Thou flitt'st athwart the pensive wanderer's way. 
As his lone footsteps print the mountain-dew. 
From Indian isles thou comest. with Summer's car; 
Twilight thy love, thy guide her beaming star.' 

To a warm imagination, the dubious forms 
that float half-veiled in darkness, afford a 
higher delight than the most distinct scenery 
that the sun can show. While the fancy thus 
wanders over landscapes partly of its creation, 
a sweet complacency steals upon the mind, 

* Refines it all to subtlest feeling. 
Bids the tears of rapture roll.' 

The distant note of a torrent, the weak 
trembling of the breeze among the woods, or 
the far-off sound of a human voice now lost 
and heard again, are circumstances which 
wonderfully heighten the enthusiastic tone of 
the mind. The young St. Foix, who saw the 
presentations of a fervid fancy, and felt what- 
ever enthusiasm could suggest, sometimes 
interrupted the silence which the rest of the 
party seemed by mutual consent to preserve, 
remarking and pointing oiit to Blanche the 
most striking effects of the hour upon the 
scenery ; while Blanche, whose apprehensions 
were beguiled by the conversation of her lover, 
yielded to the taste so congenial to his, and 
they conversed in a low restrained voice, the 
effect of the pensive tranquilhty which twilight 
and the scene inspired, rather than of any 
fear that they should be heard. But while 
the heart was thus soothed to tenderness, St. 
Foi.x gradually mingled with his admiration 
of the countiy a mention of his affection ; 
and he continued to speak and Blanche to 
listen, till the mountains, the woods, and the 
magical illusions of twilight, were remembered 
no more. 

The shadows of evening soon shifted to the 
gloom of night, which was somewhat antici- 
pated by the vapours that, gathering fast 
round the mountains, rolled in dark wreaths 
along their sides ; and the guides proposed to 
rest till the moon should rise, adding, that 
they thought a storm was coming on. As 
they looked round for a spot that might afford 
some kind of shelter, an object was perceived 
obscurely through the dusk, on a point of 
rock a little way down the mountain, which 
they imagined to be a hunter's or a shepherd's 
cabin, and the party with cautious steps pro- 
ceeded towards it. Their labour, however, 
was not rewarded, nor their apprehensions 
soothed ; for on reaching the object of their 



THE MVSTERIBS OF UDOLPHO. laS 

search, they discovered a monumental cross, from the inn, the travellers determined to rest 

which marked the spot to have been polluted till the moon should rise or the storm disperse, 

by murder. Blanche, recalled to a sense of the present 

The darkness would not permit them to moment, looked on the surrounding gloom 

read the inscription ; but the guides knew this with terror ; but giving her hand to St. Foix, 

to be a cross raised to the memory of a Count she alighted, and the whole party entered a 

de Beliard, who had been murdered here by a kind of cave, if such it could be called, which 

horde of banditti that had infested this part Vas only a shallow cavity formed by the curve 

of the Pyrenees a few years before ; and the of impending rocks. A light being struck, a 

uncommon size of the monument seemed to fire was kindled, whose blaze afforded some 

justify the supposition that it was erected for degree of cheerfulness and no small comfort ; 

a person of some distinction. Blanche shud- for though the day had been hot, the night 

dered as she listened to some horrid particu- air of this jmountainous region was chilling ; 

lars of the count's fate, which one of the a fire was partly necessary also to keep off the 

guides related in a low restrained tone, as if wolves with which those wilds were infested, 

the sound of his ovim voice frightened him ; Provisions being spread upon a projection 

but while they lingered at the cross, attending of the rock, the count and his family partook 

to his narrative, a flash of lightening glanced of a supper, which in a scene less rude would 

upon the rocks, thunder muttered at a dis- have been thought less excellent. When the 

tance, and the travellers, now alarmed, quitted repast was finished, St. Foix, impatient for 

this scene of solitary horror in search of shelter, the moon, sauntered along the precipice, to a 

Having regained their former track, the point that fronted the east ; but all was yet 
guides, as they passed on, endeavoured to wrapt in gloom, and the silence of night was 
interest the count by various stories of robbery, broken only by the murmuring of woods that 
and even of murder, which had been per- wavered far below, or by distant thunder, and 
petrated in the very places they must una void- now and then by the faint voices of the party 
ably pass, with accounts of their own daunt- he had quitted. He viewed with emotions of 
less courage and wonderful escapes. The awful sublimity the long volumes of sulphur- 
chief guide, or rather he who was the most eous clouds that floated along the upper and 
completely armed, drawing forth one of the middle regions of the air, and the lightnings 
four pistols that were tucked into his belt, that flashed from them, sometimes silently, 
swore that it had shot three robbers within the and at others followed by sullen peals of 
year. He then brandished a clasp knife of thunder, which the mountains feebly pro- 
enormous length, and was going to recount longed, while the whole horizon, and the 
the wonderful execution it had done, when St. abyss on which he stood, were discovered in 
Foix, perceiving that Blanche was terrified, the momentary light. Upon the succeeding 
interrupted him. The count, meanwhile, darkness, the fire which had been kindled in 
secretly laughing at the terrible histories and the cave threw a partial gleam, illuminating 
extravagant boastings of the man, resolved some points of the opposite rocks, and the 
to humour him ; and telUng Blanche in a summits of pine-woods that hung beetling on 
whisper his design, began to recount some the cliffs below, while their recesses seemed 
exploits of his own, which infinitely exceeded to frown in deeper shade, 
any related by the guide. St. Foix stopped to observe the picture 

To these surprising circumstances he so which the party in the cave presented, where 
artfully gave the colouring of truth, that the the elegant form of Blanche was finely con- 
courage of the giiides was visibly affected by trasted by the majestic figure of the count, who 
them, who continued silent long after the was seated by her on a rude stone ; and each 
count had ceased to speak. The loquacity of was rendered more impressive by the gro- 
the chief hero thus laid asleep, the vigilance tesque habits and strong features of the guides 
of his eyes and ears seemed more thoroughly and other attendants, who were in the back- 
awakened ; for he listened with much appear- ground of the piece. The effect of the light, 
ance of anxiety to the deep thunder which too, was interesting : on the surrounding 
murmured at intervals, and often paused, as figures it threw a strong though pale gleam, 
the breeze, that was now rising, rushed among and glittered on their bright arms; while 
the pines. But when he made a sudden halt upon the foliage of a gigantic larch, that ini- 
before a tuft of cork trees that projected over pended its shade over the cliff above, ap- 
the road, and drew forth a pistol, before he peared a red, dusky tint, deepening almost 
would venture to brave the banditti which imperceptibly into the blackness of night, 
might lurk behind it, the cotmt could no While St. Foix contemplated the scene, the 
longer refrain from laughter. moon, broad and yellow, rose over the eastern 

Having now, however, arrived at a level summits, from among embattled clouds, and 

spot somewhat sheltered from the air by showed dimly the grandeur of the heavens, 

over-hanging cliffs, and by a wood of larch the mass of vapours that rolled half-way down 

that rose over a precipice on the left, and the the precipice beneath, and the doubtful moun- 

guides being yet ignorant how fer they were tains. 



s^ 



THE AlYSTERtBS OP UDOLPHO. 



* What dreadful pleasure, there to stand sublime. 
Like shipwreck d mariner on desert coast. 
And view th* enormous wa.ste of vapour, tost 
In billows lengthening to th' horizon round !' 

The Minstkel. 

From this romantic reverie he was awakened 
by the voices of the guides repeating bis name, 
which was reverberated from cliff to cliff, till 
a hundred tongues seemed to call him ; when 
be soon quieted the fears of the count and 
the Lady Blanche by returning to the cave. 
As the storm, however, seemed approaching, 
they did not quit their place of shelter ; and 
the count, seated between his daughter and 
St Foix, endeavoured to divert the fears of 
the former, and conversed on subjects relating 
to the natural history of the scenes among 
which they wandered. He spoke of the 
mineral and fossil substances found in the 
depths of these mountains ; the veins of 
marble and granite with which they abound- 
ed ; the strata of shells discovered near their 
summits, many thousand fathoms above the 
level of the sea, and at a vast distance from 
its present shore ; of the tremendous chasms 
and caverns of the rocks, the grotesque form 
of the mountains, and the various phenomena 
that seem to stamp upon the world the history 
of the deluge. From the natural history he 
descended to the mention of events and 
circumstances connected with the civil story 
of the Pyrenees ; named some of the most 
remarkable fortresses which France and Spain 
had erected in the passes of these mountains ; 
and gave a brief account of some celebrated 
sieges and encounters in early times, when 
Ambition first frightened Solitude from these 
her deep recesses, made her mountains, which 
before had echoed only to the torrent's roar, 
tremble with the clang of arms, and when 
man's first footsteps in her sacred haunts had 
left the print of blood ! 

As Blanche sat attentive to the narrative 
that rendered the scenes doubly interesting, 
and resigned to solemn emotion, while she 
considered that she was on the very ground 
once polluted by these events, her reverie was 
suddenly interrupted by a sound that came on 
the wind — it was the distant bark of a watch- 
dog. The travellers listened with eager hope, 
and, as the wind blew stronger, fancied that the 
sound came from no great distance ; and the 
guides having little doubt but that it pro- 
ceeded from the inn they were in search of, 
the count determined to pursue his way. The 
moon now afforded a stronger though still an 
uncertain light, as she moved among broken 
clouds ; and the travellers, led by the sound, 
re-commenced their journey along the brow of 
the precipice, preceded by a single torch that 
now contended with the moon-light ; for the 
guides, b^eving they should reach the inn 
•oon aifter sun-set, had neglected to provide 
more. In silent caution they followed the 
Mound, which was heard but at intervals, and 



whidi, after some time, entirdy ceased. The 
guides endeavoured, however, to point their 
course to the quarter whence it had issued ; 
but the deep roaring of a torrent soon seized 
their attention, and presently they came to a 
tremendous chasm of the mountain, which 
seemed to forbid all further ]Hogress. Blanche 
alighted from her mule, as did the count and 
St, Foix, while the guides traversed the edge 
in search of a bridge, which, however rude, 
might convey them to the opposite side ; and 
they at length confessed, what the Count had 
b^un to suspect, that they had been forsome 
time doubtful of their way, and were now 
certain only that th^ had k»t it 

At a little distance was discovered a rude 
and dangerous passage, formed by an enor- 
mous pine, which, thrown across Uie chasm, 
united the opposite precipices, and which had 
been felled probably by the hunter to facilitate 
his chase of the izajxl or the wolf. The 
whole party, the guides excepted, shuddered 
at the prospect of crossing this Alpine bridge, 
whose sides afforded no kind of defence, and 
from which to fall was to die. The guides, 
however, prepared to lead over the mules, 
while Blanche stood trembling on the brink 
and listening to the roar of the waters, which 
were seen descending from rocks above over- 
hung with lofty pines, and thence preciftitating 
themselves into the deep abjrss, where their 
white surges gleamed faintly in the moon- 
hght. The poor animals proceeded over this 
perilous bridge with instinctive caution, nei^er 
frightened by the noise of the cataract, nor de- 
ceived by the gloom which the impending 
foliage threw athwart their way. It was now 
that the solitary torch, which had been 
hitherto of little service, was found to be an 
inestimable treasure ; and Blanche, terrified, 
shrinking, but endeavouring to re-collect all 
her firmness and presence of mind, pre- 
ceded by her lover and supported by her 
father, followed the red gleam of the torch in 
safety to the opposite cl&. 

As they went on, the heights contracted and 
formed a narrow pass, at the bottom of whicti' 
the torrent they had just crossed was heard 
to thunder. But they were again cheered by 
the bark of a dog keeping watch, perhaps 
over the flocks of the mountains to protect 
them from the nightly descent of the wolves. 
The sound was much nearer than before ; and 
while they rejoiced in the hope of soon reach- 
ing a place of repose, a light was seen to 
glimmer at a distance. It appeared at a 
height considerably above the level of their 
path, and was lost and seen again, as if the 
waving branches of trees sometimes excluded 
and then admitted its rays. The guides hal- 
loed with all their strength, but the sotmd 
of no human voice was heard in return ; and 
at length, as a more effectual means of mak* 
ing themselves known, they fired a pistoL 
But while they listened in anxious expecta* 



THE MYSTERIES OP VDOLPHO. 137 

tion, the noise of the explosion was alone the breach of the law by the most cruel death, 
heard echoing among the rocks, and it gra- travel in large parties well armed, — often 
dually sunk into silence, which no friendly daunts the courage of the soldiers. The 
hint of man disturbed. The light, however, smugglers who seek only safety, never en- 
that had been seen before, now broame plainer, gage when they can possibly avoid if; the 
and soon after voices were heard indistinctly military also, who know that in these en- 
on the wind ; but upon the guides repeating counters danger is certain, and glory almost 
the call, the voices suddenly ceased« and the unattainable, ar» equally reluctant to fight ; 
light disappeared. an engagement therefore very seldom hap- 

The Lady Blanche was now almost sinking pens ; but when it does, it never concludes 
beneath the pressure of anxiety, fatigue, and till after the most desperate and bloodv con- 
apprehension ; and the united efforts of the flicL ' You are inattentive, Blanche,' added the 
count and St. Foix could scarcely support her count : * I have wearied you with a dull subject ; 
spirits. As they continued to advance, an but see yonder, in the moon-light, is the edifice 
object was perceived on a point of rock we have been in search of, and we are for- 
above, which, the strong rays of the moon tunate to be so near it before the storm 
then falling on it, appeared to be a watch- bursts.' 

tower. The count, from its situation and Blanche, looking up, perceived that they 
some other circumstances, had little doubt were at the foot of the cliff, on whose summit 
that it was such ; and believing that the light the building stood, but no light now issued 
bad proceeded from thence, he endeavoured from it ; the barking of the dog too had for 
to re-animate his daughter's spirits by the some time ceased ; and the gmdes bep;an to 
near prospect of shelter and repose, which, doubt whether this was really the object of 
however rude the accommodation, a ruined their search. From the distance at which they 
watch-tower might a£ford. surveyed it, shown imperfectly by a cloudy 

' Numerous watch-towers have been erected moon, it appeared to t)e of more extent than 
among the Pyrenees,' said the count, anxious a single watch-tower ; but the difficulty was 
only to call Blanche's attention from the sub- how to ascend the height, whose abrupt acdi- 
ject of her fears ; * and the method by which vities seemed to afford no kind of path-way. 
they give intelligence of the approach of the While the guides carried forward the torch 
enemyr is, you know, by fires kindled on the to examine the cliff, the count, remaining with 
summits of these edifices, ^gnals have thus Blanche and St Foiz at its foot, under the 
sometimes been commimicated from post to shadow of the woods, endeavoured again to 
post along a frontier line of several hundred beguile the time by conversation, but again 
miles in length. Then, as occasion may re- anxiety abstracted the mind of Blanche : and 
quire, the lurking armies emerge from their he then consulted apart with St. Foix, whether 
K>rtresses and the forests, and march forth to it would be advisable, should a path be found, 
defend perhaps the entrance of some grand to venture to an edifice which might possibly 
pass, where, planting Aemselves on the harbour banditti. They considered that their 
heights, they assaU their astonished enemies, own party was not small, and that several of 
who wind along the glen below, with frag- them were weU armed ; and after enumerating 
ments of the shattered cliff, and pour death the dangers to be incurred by passing the 
and defeat upon them. The ancient forts and night in the open wild, exposed perhaps to the 
watch-towers overlooking the grand passes of effects of a thunderstorm, there remained not 
the Pyrenees are carefully preserved ; but a doubt that they ought to endeavour to 
some of those in inferior stations have been obtain admittance to the edifice above, at any 
suffered to fall into decay, and are now fre- hazard respecting the inhabitants it might 
quently converted into the more peaceful harbour : but the (Eirkness, and the dead silence 
habitation of the hunter or the shepherd, that surrounded it, appeared to contradict 
who after a day of toil retires hither, and, the probability of its being inhabited at all. 
with his faithful dogs, forgets, near a cheer- A shout from the guides aroused their atten- 
ful blaze, the labour of the chase, or the tion, after which, in a few minutes, one of the 
anxiety of collecting his wandering flocks, count's servants returned with intelligence that 
while he is sheltered from the nightly storm.' a path was found, and they immediately 
'But are they always thus peacefully in- hastened to join the guides, when they all 
habited?' said the Lady Blanche. ascended a little winding way cut in the rock 

' No,' replied the count ; • they are some- among the thickets of dwarf wood, and after 
times the asylum of French and Spanish much toil and some danger reached the sum- 
smugglers, who cross the mountains with mit, where several niinea towers surrounded 
contraband goods from their respective coun- by a massy wsdl rose to their view, partially 
tries ; and the latter are particularly numerous, illumined by the moonlight The space around 
against whom strong parties of the king's the buildinjg was silent, fend apparently for- 
troops are sometimes sent. But the desperate saken : but the count iiras cautious. * Step 
resolutioip of these adventurers, — ^who, know- softly,' said he in a low voice, * while we 
ing that if they are taken they must expiate reconnoitre the ediflcJe/ 



128 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

Having proceeded silently along for some strengthened by the discovery of the dog that 

paces, they stopped at a gate whose portals guarded the fort, as well as by the stillness 

were terrible even in ruins ; and, after a that pervaded it. He therefore ordered one 

moment's hesitation, passed on to the court of of his servants to knock at the gate ; who was 

entrance, but paused again at the head of a advancing to obey him, when a light appeared 

terrace, which, branching from it, ran along through the loop-hole of one of the towers, 

the brow of a precipice. Over this rose the and the count called loudly : but receiving no 

main body of the edifice, whi^ was now seen to answer, he went up to the gate himself, and 

be not a watch-tower, but one of those ancient struck upon it with an iron pointed pole which 

fortresses that from age and neglect had had assisted him to climb the steep. When 

fallen to decay. Many parts of it, however, the echoes had ceased that this blow had 

appeared to be still entire; it was built of awakened, the renewed barking — and there 

grey stone, in the heavy Saxon-Gothic style, were now more than one dog — ^was the only 

with enormous round towers, buttresses of sound that was heard. The count steppe 

proportionable strength, and the arch of the back a few paces to observe whether the light 

large gate which seemed to open into the hall was in the tower ; and perceiving that it was 

of the fabric was round, as was that of a gone, he returned to the portal, and had lifted 

window above. The air of solemnity which the pole to strike again, when again he fancied 

must so strongly have characterised the pile he heard the murmur of voices veithin, and 

even in the days of its early strength, was paused to listen. He was confirmed in the 

now considerably heightened by its shattered supposition, but they were too remote to be 

battlements and half-demolished walls,' and by heard otherwise than in a murmur, and the 

the huge masses of ruin scattered in its wide count now let the pole fall heavily upon the 

area, now silent and grass-grown. In this gate, when almost immediately a profound 

court of entrance stood the gigantic remains silence followed. It was apparent that lie 

of an oak, that seemed to have flourished and people within had heard the sound, and their 

decayed with the building, which it still caution in admitting strangers gave him a 

appeared frowningly to protect by the few favourable opinion of them. * They are either 

remaining branches, leafless and moss-grown, hunters or shepherds,' said he, *who, like 

that crowned its trunk, and whose wide extent ourselves, have probably sought shelter from 

told how enormous the tree had been in a the night within these walls, and are fearful 

former age. This fortress was evidently once of admitting strangers, lest they should prove 

of great strength, and from its situation on robbers. I will endeavour to remove their 

a point of rock impending over a deep glen, fears.' So saying, he called aloud. 'We are 

had been of great power to annoy as well as friends, who ask shelter from the night' 

to resist : the count, therefore, as he stood In a few moments steps were heard wiSiin, 

surveying it, was somewhat surprised that it which approached, and a voice then inquired 

had been siiffered, ancient as it was, to sink — 'Who calls?' 'Friends,' repeated thecount; 

into ruins, and its present lonely and deserted * open the gates, and you shall know more.' 

air excited in his breast emotions of melancholy Strong bolts were now heard to be undrawn, 

awe. While he indulged for a moment these and a man armed with a hunting-spear ap- 

emotions, he thought he heard a sound of peared. ' What is it you want at this hour f 

remote voices steal upon the stillness from said he. The count beckoned his attendants, 

within the building, the front of which he and then answered, that he wished to inquire 

again surveyed with scrutinizing eyes, but yet the way to the nearest cabin. * Are you so 

no light was visible. He now determined to little acquainted with these mountains, ' said 

walk round the fort, to that remote part of it the man, ' as not to know that there is none 

whence he thought the voices had arisen, that within several leagues ? I cannot show you 

he might examine whether any light could be the way ; you must seek it — there's a moon.' 

discerned there, before he ventured to knock Saying this, he was closing the gate, and thwe 

at ^e gate : for this purpose he entered upon count was turning away half disappointed and 

the terrace, where the remains of cannon were half afraid, when another voice was heard 

yet apparent in the thick walls : but he had from above ; and on looking up, he saw a 

not proceeded many paces when his steps light and a man's face at the grate of the 

were suddenly arrested by the loud barking of portal. ' Stay, friend, you have lost your 

a dog within, and which he fancied to be the way ?' said the voice. ' You are hunters, I 

same whose voice had been the means of bring- suppose, like ourselves? I will be with you 

ing the travellers thither. It now appeared presently.' The voice ceased, and the light 

certain that the place was inhabited ; and the disappeared. Blanche had been alarmed liy 

count returned to consult again with St. Foix, the appearance of the* man who had opened 

whether he should try to obtain admittance, the gate, and she now entreated her father to 

for its wild aspect had somewhat shaken his quit the place : but the count had observed 

former resolution : but after a second consul- the hunter's spear which he carried, and the 

tation, he submitted to the considerations words from the tower encouraged him to 

which before determined him, and which were await the event. The gate was soon opened : 



THE MYSTJEHIES OF VbOLPHO. 



129 



And several men in hunters' habits, who had 
heard above what had passed below, ap- 
peared ; and having listened some time to the 
count, told him he was welcome to rest there 
for the night. They then pressed him with 
much courtesy to enter, and to partake of 
such fare as they were about to sit down to. 
The count, who had observed them attentively 
while they spoke, was cautious and somewhat 
suspicious ; but he was also weary, fearful of 
the approaching storm, and of encountering 
Alpine heights in the obscurity of night : being 
likewise somewhat confident in the strength 
and number of his attendants, he, after some 
further consideration; determined to accept 
the invitation. With this resolution he called 
his servants, who advancing round the tower, 
behind which some of them had silently listened 
to this conference, followed their lord, the 
Lady Blanche, and St. Foix, into the foi^t- 
ress. "The strangers led them on to a 
large and rude hsul, partially seen by a fire 
that blazed at its extremity, round which four 
men in the hunter's dress were seated, and on 
the hearth were several dogs stretched in sleep. 
In the middle of the hall stood a large table, 
and over the fire some part of an animal was 
boiling. As the count approached, the men 
arose : and the dogs, half raising themselves, 
looked fiercely at the strangers, but on hearing 
their masters' voices, kept their postures on 
the hearth. 

Blanche looked round this gloomy and 
spacious hall ; then at the men, and to her 
father, who, smiling cheerfully at her, ad- 
dressed himself to the hunters. ' This is an . 
hospitable hearth,' said he : ' the blaze of the 
fire is reviving after having wandered so long 
in these dreary wilds. Your dogs are tired ; 
what success have you had ?' . * Such as we 
usually have,* replied one of the men, who 
had been seated in the hall ; ,'we kill our 
game with tolerable certainty.' — 'These are 
fellow-hunters,' said one of the men who had 
brought the count hither, * that have lost 
their way, and I have told them there is room 
enough in the fort for us all.' — 'Very true, 
very true,' replied his companion : ' what luck 
have you had in the chase, brothers ?* ' We 
have killed two izards, and that you will say 
is pretty well.' — 'You mistake, friend,' said 
the count * ' we are not hunters, but traveller's ; 
but if you will admit us to hunters' fare we 
shall be well contented, and will repay your 
kindness.* — 'Sit down then, brother,' said 
one of the men : • Jacques, lay more fuel on 
the fire, the kid will soon be ready ; bring a 
seat for the lady too. Ma'amselle, will you 
taste our brandy ? it is true Barcelona, and as 
bright as ever flowed from a keg. Blanche 
timidly smiled, and was going to refuse, when 
her father prevented her, by taking, with a 
good-humoiu-ed air, the glass offered to his 
daughter ; and Monsieur St. Foix, who was 
seated next her, pressed her hand, an I z''^'^ 



her an encouraging look ; but her attention 
was engaged by a man who sat silently by the 
fire, observing St. Foix with a steady and 
earnest eye. 

'You lead a jolly life here,' said the count. 
• The life of a hunter is a pleasant and a healthy 
one ; and the repose is sweet which succeeds 
to your labour. ' 

• Yes,' replied one of the hosts, ' om* life is 
pleasant enough. We live here only during 
the summer and autumnal months ; in winter 
the place is dreary, and the swollen torrents 
that descend from the heights put a stop to 
the chase.' 

' 'Tis a life of liberty and enjoyment,' said 
the count : ' I should like to pass a month in 
your way very well.' 

'We find emplo3rment for ovu* guns too,* 
said a man who stood behind the count : 
' here are plenty of birds of delicious flavour, 
that feed upon the wild thyme and herbs that 
grow in the valleys. Now I think of it, there 
is a brace of birds hung up in the stone gal- 
lery ; go fetch them, Jaques ; we will lw,ve 
them dressed.* 

The count now made inquiry concerning 
the method of pursuing the chase among the 
rocks and precipices of these romantic regions, 
and was listening to a curious detail, when a 
horn was sounded at the gate. Blanche 
looked timidly at her father, who continued 
to converse on the subject of the chase, but 
whose countenance was somewhat expressive 
of anxeity, and who often turned his eyes to- 
wards that part of the hall nearest the gate. 
The horn sounded again, and a loud halloo 
succeeded. ' There are some of our com- 
panions returned from their day's labour,' 
said a man, going lazily from his seat towards 
the gate ; and in a few minutes two men ap- 
peared, each with a gun over his shoulder 
and pistols in his belt. 'What cheer, my 
lads? what cheer?' said they, as they ap- 
proached. * What luck ?' retmned their com- 
panions : • have you brought home your sup- 
per? You shall have none else.* 

• Hah ! who the devil have you brought 
home?' said they in. bad Spanish, on perceiv- 
ing the count's party ; ' are they from France, 
or Spain ? — ^where did you meet with them 1^ 

' They met with us ; and a merry meeting 
too,' replied his companion aloud in good 
French. ' This chevalier and his party had 
lost their way, and asked a night's lodging in 
the fort.' 'The others made no reply, but 
threw down a kind of knapsack, ana drew 
forth several brace pf birds. The tag sounded 
heavily as it fell to the ground, and the glit- 
ter of some bright metal within glanced on 
the eye of the count, who now surveyed with 
a more inquiring look the man that neld the 
knapsack. He was a tall, robust figure, of a 
hard countenance, and had short black hair 
curling on his neck. Instead of the hunter's 
dress, he wore a faded military uniform ; san- 

10 



130 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHCk 



dais were laced on his broad legs : and a kind 
of short trowsers hung from his waist. On 
his head he wore a leather cap, somewhat re- 
sembling in shape an ancient Roman helmet ; 
but the brows that scowled beneath it would 
have characterised those of the barbarians 
who conquered Rome, rather than those of a 
Roman soldier. The count at length turned 
away his eyes, and remained silent and 
thoughtful, till, again raising them, he per- 
ceived a figure standing in an obscure part of 
the hall, fiuced in attentive gaze on St Foix, 
who was conversing with Blanche, and did 
not observe this ; but the count soon after 
saw the same man looking over the shoulder 
of the soldier as attentively at himself. He 
withdrew his eye when that of the count met 
it, who felt mistrust gathering fast upon his 
mind, but feared to betray it in his counten- 
ance, and, forcing his features to assume a 
smile, addressed Blanche on some indi£ferent 
subject When he again looked round, he 
perceived that the soldier and his companion 
were gone. 

The man who was called Jaques now re- 
turned from the stone gallery. 'A fire is 
lighted there,' said he, 'and the birds are 
dressing ; the table, too, is spread there, for 
that place is warmer than this.' 

His companions approved of the removal, 
and invited their guests to follow to the gal- 
lery ; of whom Blanche appeared distressed 
and remained silent, and St Foix looked at 
the count, who said he preferred the comfort- 
able blaze of the fire he was then near. The 
hunters, however, commended the warmth of 
the other apartment, and pressed his removal 
with such seeming courtesy, that the count, 
half doubting and half fearful of betraying 
his doubts, consented to go. The long and 
ruinous passages through which th^ went, 
somewhat daunted him; but the tnunder, 
which now burst in loud peals above, made it 
dangerous to quit this place of shelter, and 
he forbore to provoke his conductors by 
showing that he distrusted them. The 
hunter^ led the way with a lamp : the count 
and St Foix, who wished to please their hosts 
by some instances of familiarity, carried each 
a seat, and Blanche followed with faltering 
steps. As she passed on, part of her dress 
caught on a nail in the waJl ; and while she 
stopped, somewhat too scrupulously, to dis- 
engage it, the count, who was talking to St. 
Foix, and neither of whom observed the cir- 
cumstance, followed their conductor round an 
abrupt angle of the passage, and Blanche was 
left behind in darkness. The thunder pre- 
vented them from hearing her call ; but, 
having disengaged her dress, she quickly fol- 
lowed, as she thought, the way they had 
taken. A light that glimmered at a distance 
•onfirmed this belief ; and she proceeded to- 
wards an open door whence it issued, conjec- 
turing the room beyond to be the stone gal- 



lery the men had spoken of. Hearing voiotf 
as she advanced, she paused within a few ' 
paces of the chamber, that she might be oer* 
tain whether she was right ; and from thence, 
by the light of a lamp that himg from the 
ceiling, observed four men seated round a 
table, over which they leaned in apparent 
consultation. In one of them she distin- 
guished the features of him whom she had 
observed gazing at St Foix with such deep 
attention ; and who was now speaking in an 
earnest, though restrained voice, till one of 
his companions seeming to oppose him, they 
spoke together in a loud and harsher tone. 
Blanche, alarmed by perceiving that neither 
her father nor St Foix was there, and tern- 
fied at the fierce countenances and manners 
of these men, was turning Jbastily from the 
chamber to pursue her s^rch of the gallery, 
when she heard one of the men say : 

' Let all dispute end here. Who talks of 
danger? Follow my advice, and there will be 
none — secure them, and the rest are an easy 
prey.' Blanche, struck with these words, 
paused a moment to hear more. ' There is 
nothing to be got by the rest,' said one of his 
companions ; ' I am never for blood when I 
can help it — dispatch the two others, and our 
business is done : the rest may so. ' i. 

' May they so 1' exclaimed me first ruffian i 
with a tremendous oath — * What 1 to tell how ' 
we have disposed of their master, and to send | 
the king's troops to drag us to the wheel f You i 
was always a choice adviser — I warrant we > 
have not yet forgot St. Thomas's eve, last year.' 

Blanche's heart now sunk with horror. Her 
first impulse was to retreat from the door; 
but when she would have gone, her trembling 
frame refused to support her, and having tot- 
tered a few paces to a more obscure part of 
the passage, she was compelled to listen to 
the dreadful counsels of those who, she was 
no longer suffered to doubt, were banditti 
In the next moment she heard the following 
words : ' Why, you would not murd^ the 
whole gang f 

' I warrant our lives are as good as theirs,' 
replied his comrade. ' If we don't kill them, 
they will hang us ; better they should die 
than we be hanged.' 

• Better, better,' cried his comrades. 

' To commit murder is a hopeful way of 
escaping the gallows !' said the first ruffian— 
' many an honest fellow has run his head into 
the noose that way, though.' There was a 
pause for some moments, during which they 
appeared to be considering. 

• Confound those fellows,' exclaimed one of 
the robbers impatiently, ' they ought to have 
been here by this time ; they will come back 
presently with the old story, and no booty ; 
if they were here, our business would be plain 
and easy. I see we shall not be able to do 
business to-night, for our numbers are not 
equal to the enemy ; and in the morning they 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



«3X 



will be for marching off, and how can we de- ' But how are we to manage this business ?' 
tain them without force T said the second ruffian, ' let us talk of that ; 

' I have been thinking of a scheme that will there is no fear of there being booty enough. 



do,' said one of his comrades ; ' if we can dis- 
patch the two chevaliers silently, it will be 
easy to master the rest' . 

' That's a plausible scheme, in good faith I' 
said another with a smile of scorn — ' If I can 
eat my way through the prison-wall, I shall 



but how are we to secure it?* 

* Aye, aye,' said his comrades ; ' let us talk 
of that, and remember no time is to be lost.' 

• I am still for poison,' oteerved the third : 
•but consider their number; why there are 
nine or ten of them, and armed too ; when I 



be at liberty ! — How can we dispatch them saw so many at the gate, I was not for letting 

silently f them in, you know, nor you either.' 

'By poison,' replied his companions. 'I thought they might be some of our 

• Well said ! that will do,' said the second enemies,' replied the second ; ' I did not so 

ruffian ; ' that will give a lingering death too, much mind nimibers.' 

and satisfy my revenge. These barons shall take 'But you must mind them now,' rejoined 

care how they again tempt our vengeance. ' his comrade, • or it will be worse for you. We 

' I knew the son the moment I saw him,' are not more than six, and how can we master 

said the man whom Blanche had observed ten by open force ? I tell you we must give 



gazing on St. Foix, ' though he does not know 
me ; the father I had almost forgotten.' 

' Well, you may say what you will,' said the 
third ruffian, ' but I don't believe he is the 
baron ; and I am as likely to know as any of 
you, for I was one of them that attacked him 
with our brave lads that suffered.' 
, 'And was not I another?' said the first 
ruffian. ' I tell you he is the baron ; but what 



some of them a dose, and the rest may then 
be managed.' 

•I'll tell you a better way,' rejoined the 
other impatiently ; ' draw closer.' 

Blanche, who had listened to this conversa- 
tion in an agony which it woiUd be impossible 
to describe, could no longer distinguish what 
Mras said, for the ruffians now spoke in lowered 
voices : but the hope that she might save her 



does it signify whether he is or not? — shall we friends from the plot, if she could find her way 
let all this booty go out of our hands? It quickly to them, suddenly re-animated her 
is not often we have such luck as this. While spirits, and lent her strength enough to turn 
we run the chance of the wheel for smuggling her steps in search of the gsdlery. Terror, 
a few pounds of tobacco, to cheat the king's however, and darkness conspired against her ; 
manufactory, and of breaking oiu- necks down and having moved a few yards, the feeble 
the precipices in chase of our food ; and now light that issued from the chamber no longer 
and then rob a brother smuggler, or a strag- even contended with the gloom, and her foot 
gling pilgrim, of what scarcely repays us the stumbling over a step that crossed the passage, 
powder we fire at them ; shall we let such a she fell to the ground. 

prize as this go? Why, they have enough The noise startled the banditti, who became 
about them to keep us for ' suddenly silent, and then all rushed to the 



I am not for that, I am not for that/ re- 
plied the third robber ; let us make the most 
of them. Only, if this is the baron, I should 
like to have a flash the more at him, for the 



passage, to examine whether any person was 
there who might have overheard their coun- 
sels. Blanche saw them approaching, and 
perceived their fierce and eager looks ; but 



sake of our brave comrades that he brought before she could raise herself, they discovered 

to the gallows.' and seized her ; and as they dragged her to- 

• Aye, aycr flash as much as you will,' re- wards the chamber they had quitted, her 

joined the first man, ' but I tell you the baron screams drew from them horrible threatenings. 

is a taller man.' Having reached the room, they began to 

' Confound your quibbling,' said the second consult what they should do with her. ' Let us 

ruffian, ' Shall we let them go or not ? If we first know what she "has heard,' said the chief 



stay here much longer they will take the hint, 
and march off without our leave. Let them 
be who they will, they are rich, or why all 
those servants? Did you see the ring he whom 
you call the baron had on his finger ?— it was a 
diamond ; butlie has not got it on now : he saw 
me looking at it, I warrant, and took it off.' 



robber. • How long have you been in the pas- 
sage, lady, and what brought you there?' 

• Let us first secure that picture,' said one of 
his comrades, approaching the trembling 
Blanche. • Fair lady, by your leave, that pic- 
ture ; come, surrender it, or I shall seize it.' 

Blanche, entreating their mercy, immedi- 



' Aye, and then there is the picture ; did you ately gave up the miniature, while another of 
see that? She has not taken that off,' ob- the nmians fiercely interrogated her concern- 
served the first ruffian, ' it hangs ^t her neck ; ing what she had overheard of their conversa- 
if it had not sparkled so, I £ould not have tion ; when her confusion and terror too 
found it out, for it was almost hid by her plainly telling what her tongue feared to con- 
dress : thpse are diamonds too, and a rare less, the ruffians looked expressively upon one 
Qiany of them there must be to go round such another, and two of them withdrew to a re- 
a large picture. ' mote part of the room, as if (o consult further. 



X3fl THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

' These are diamonds by St. Peter!' ex- pale and disfigured countenance of St Foix.- 
claimed the fellow who had been examining Her horrors at that moment may be easily 
the miniature, 'and here is a very pretty pic- imagined. He was speechless; his eyes were 
ture too, 'faith ; as handsome a young cheva- half closed ; and on the hand which She 
her as you woidd wish to see by a sunmier's grasped in the agony of despair cold damps 
sun. Lady, this is your spouse, I warrant, had settled. While she vainly repeated his 
for it is the spark that was in your company name, and called for assistance, steps ap- 
just now.' proached, and a person entered the chamber, 

Blanche, sinking with terror, conjiuredhimto who, she soon perceived, was not the count 
have pity on her, and, delivering him her purse, her father ; but what was her astonishment, 
promised to say nothing of what had passed when, supplicating him to give his assistance 
if he would suffer her to return to her friends, to St. Foix, she discovered Ludovico! He 

He smiled ironically, and was going to re- scarcely paused to recognise her, but imme- 
ply, when his attention was called off by a dis- diately bound up the wounds of the chevalier, 
tant noise ; and while he listened, he grasped and perceiving that he had fainted probably 
the arm of Blanche more firmly, as if he from loss of blood, ran for water ; but he had 
feared she would escape from hun, and she been absent only a few moments, when 
again shrieked for help. Blanche heard other steps approaching ; and 

The approaching sounds called the rufiians while she was almost frantic with apprehen- 
from the other part of the chamber. ' We are sion of the ruffians, the light of a torch flashed 
betrayed,' said they ; * but let us listen a mo- upon the walls, and then Count de Villefort 
ment, perhaps it is only our conorades come appeared with an af&ighted countenance, and 
in from the mountains, and if so, our. work is breathless with impatience, calling upon his 
sure — listen I' daughter. At the sotmd of his voice she rose, 

A distant discharge of shot confirmed this and ran to his arms, while he, letting fall the 
supposition for a moment : but in the next, bloody sword he held, pressed her to his 
the former sounds drawing nearer, the clash- bosom in a transport of gratitude and joy, and 
ing of swords, mingled with the voices of loud then hastily inquired for St Foix, who now 
contention and with heavy groans, was dis- gave some signs of life. Ludovico soon after 
tinguished in the avenue leading to the cham- returning with water and brandy, the forma: 
ber. While the ruffians prepared their arms, was applied to his lips, and the latter to his 
they heard themselves called by some of their temples and hands, and Blanche, at length, 
comrades afar off, and' then a shrill horn was saw him imclose his eyes, and then heard him 
sounded without the fortress, a signal, it ap- inquire for her : but the joy she felt on this 
peared, they too well understood ; for three of occasion was interrupted by new alarms, when 
them, leaving the Lady Blanche to the care of Ludovico said it woidd be necessary to re- 
the fourth, instantly rushed from the chamber, move Mons. St Foix immediatelv, and added, 

While Blanche, trembling and nearly faint- ' The banditti that are out, my lord, were ex- 
ing, was supplicating for release, she heard pectedhomeanhourago.andtheywillcertainly 
amid the tumult that approached, the voice of find us if we delay. That shrill horn, they 
St. Foix ; and she had scarcely renewed her know, is never sounded by their comrades but 
shriek, when the door of the room was thrown on most desperate occasions, and it echoes 
open, and he appeared much disfigured with among the mountains for many leagues roimd. 
blood, and pursued by several ruffians. I have known them brought home t^ its 
Blanche neither saw nor heard any more ; her sound even from the Pied de Melicant Is any- 
head swam, her sight failed, and she became onestandingwatch at the great gate, my lord?* 
senseless in the arms of the robber who had ' Nobody,' replied the count ; * the rest of 
detained her. my people are now scattered about, I scarcely 

When she recovered, she perceived, by the know where. Go, Ludovico, collect them to- 
gloomy light that trembled round her, that gether, and look out yourself, and listen if 
she was in the same chamber ; but neither the you hear the feet of mules.' 
count, St. Foix, nor any other person ap- Ludovico then hurried away, and the count 
peared, and she continued for some time en- consulted as to the means of removing St 
tirely still, and nearly in a state of stupefaction. Foix, who could not have borne the motion of 
But the dreadful images of the past returning, a mule, even if his strength would have sup- 
she endeavoured to raise herself, that she ported him in the saddle, 
might seek her friends ; when a sullen groan While the count was telling that the ban- 
at a httle distance reminded her of St Foix, ditti, whom they had found in the fort, were 
and of the condition in which she had seen secured in the dungeon, Blanche observed that 
him enter this room ; then, starting from the he was hinjself woun4ed, and that his left arm 
floor by a sudden effort of horror, she ad- was entirely useless ; but he smiled at her 
vanced to the place whence the sound had anxiety, assuring her the woupd was trifling, 
proceeded, where a body was lying stretched The count's servants, except two who kept 
upon the pavement, and where, by the glim- watch at the gate, now appeared, and sooa 
mmn^f Ij^ht of a Jamp, she 4wov^ed th? after Ludgyieo. * I think I be?ir ipvUes coming 



THE MYSTERIRS OP UDOLPHO. ISS 

along the glen, my lord,' said he, 'but the fort some flasks of rich Spanish 'wine, which 
roaring of the torrent below will not let me be now proved a reviving cordial not only to Su 
certain : however, I have brought what will Foix but to the whote party ; though to him 
serve the chevalier,' he added, showing a it gave only a temporaiy relief, for it fed the 
bear's skin fastened to a couple of long poles, fever that burned in his veins, and he could 
which had been adapted for the purpose of neither disguise in his countenance the anguish 
bringing home such of the banditti as hap- he suffered, nor suppress the wish that he wai 
pened to be wounded in their encounters, arrived at the inn where they had designed to 
Ludovico spread it on the ground, and, plac- pass the preceding night 
ing the skins of several goats upon it, made a While they thus reposed themselves under 
kind of bed, into which the chevalier, who the shade of the dark green pines, the count 
was however now much revived, was gently desired Ludovico to explain shortly by what 
hfted; and the poles being raised upon the means he had disappeared from the north 
shoulders of the guides, whose footing among apartment, how he came into the hands of the 
these steeps could best be depended upon, he Imnditti, and how he had contributed so essen- 
was borne along with an easy motion. Some tiaUy to serve him and his iiEunily, for to him 
of the count's servants were also wounded, but he justly attributed their present deliverance, 
not materially ; and their wounds being bound Ludovico was going to obey him, when sud- 
up, they now followed to the great gate. As denly they heard the echo of a pistol-shot from 
they passed along the'hall, a loud tumult was the way they had passed, and th^ rose in 
heard at some distance, and Blanche was terri- alarm hastily to pursue their route, 
fied. ' It is only those villains in the dungeon, 

my lady,' said Ludovico. • They seem to be 

bursting it open,' said the count. ' No, my 

lord,' replied Ludovico, • it has an iron door ; rHAPTFR T T 

we have nothing to fear from them ; but let ^riAriiLK. i^i. 

me go first, and look out from the rampart.' 'Ah, why did Fate his steps decoy 

They quickly followed him, and found then- In stormv paths to roam, ^ ^ 

mules browsing before the gates, where the Remote from all congenial joy I 

party listened anxiously, but heard no sound, ttib. 

except that of the torrent below, and of the Emily, meanwhile, was still suffering anxiety 
earlybreezesighingamong the branches of the as to the fate of Valancourt ; but Theresa, 
old oak that grew in the court ; and they were having at length found a person whom she 
now glad to perceive the first tints of dawn could intrust on her errand to the steward, 
over the mountain-tops. When they had informed her that the messenger would return 
mounted their mules, Ludovico, undertaking on the following da^ ; and Emily promised to 
to be their guide, led them by an easier path be at the cottage, Theresa being too lame to 
than that by which they had formerly ascended attend her. 

into the glen. ' We must avoid that valley to In the evening, therefore, Emily set out 
the east, my lord,' said he, * or we may meet alone for the cottage, with a melancholy fore- 
Ihe banditti ; they went out that way in the boding concerning Valancourt, while perhaps 
morning.' the gloom of the hour might contribute to 

The travellers, soon after, quitted this glen, depress her spiriu. It was a grav autumnal 
and found themselves in a narrow valley that evening, towards the close of the season ; 
stretched towards the north-west. The morning- heavy mists partially obscured the mountains, 
light upon the mountains now strengthened and a chilling breeze, that sighed among the 
fast, and gradually discovered the green hil- beech woods, strewed her path with some of 
locks that skirted the wmding feet of the dififs, their last yellow leaves. These circling in the 
tufted with cork-tree and evergreen oak. The blast, and fortelling the death of the year. 
thunder-clouds, being dispersed, had left the gave an image of • desolation to her mind, and 
sky perfectly serene, and Blanche was revived in her fancy seemed to announce the death of 
by the fresh breeze and by the view of verdure Valancourt. Of this she had, indeed, more 
which the late rain had brightened. Soon than once, so strong a presentiment, that she 
after, the sun arose, when the dripping rocks, was on the pomt of returning home, feelinig: 
with the shrubs that fringed their summits, herself unequal to an encoimter with the cer- 
and many a turfy slope below, sparkled in his tainty she anticipated ; but, contending wiUi 
rays. A wreath of mist was seen floating her emotions, she so far commanded them as 
along the extremity of the valley ; but the gale to be able to proceed. 

bore it before the travellers, and the sunbeams While she walked mournfully on, gazing on 
gradually drew it up towards the summit of the long volumes of vapour that poured upon 
the mountains. They had proceeded about a the sky, and watching the swallows tossed 
league, when St. Foix having complained of along the wind, nqw disappearing anaoivg 
extreme faintness, they stopped to give him tempestuous clouds, and then emerging, for a 
refreshment, and that the men who bore him moment, in circles upon the calmer air, the 
might rest. Ludovico had brought firom the afllicti«p? and vicis^tHde? pf ?)er latf vX^ 



*S4 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. 



seemed portrayed in these fleeting images ;— 
thus had she been tossed upon the stormy sea 
of misfortune for the last year, with but short 
fnter^ls of peace, if peace that could be called 
which was only the delay of evils. And now, 
<«rh«i she had escaped from so many dangers, 
Kiras become independent of the will of those 
>irho'had oppressed her, and found herself 
mistress of a large fortune — now, when she 
tm^tii reasonably have expected happiness, 
she perceived that she was as distant from 
it as ever. She would have accused hen- 
self of weakness and ingratitude in thus 
SuiTering a sense of the various blessings she 
possessed to be overcome by that of a single 
misfArtune, had this misfortune affected her- 
wAi alone ; but when she had wept for Valan- 
court even as living, tears of compassion had 
minjg^led with those of regret ; and while she 
lamented a human being degraded to vice, 
and consequently to misery, reason and 
humanity claimed these tears, and fortitude 
had not yet taught her to separate them from 
those of love. In the present moments, how- 
ever, it was not the certainty of his guilt, but 
the apprehension of his death (of a death also, 
to which she herself, however innocently, ap- 
peared to have been in some degree instrumen- 
tal) that now oppressed her. This fear increased, 
as the means of certainty concerning it ap- 
^oached ; and when she came within view of 
Theresa's cottage, she was so much dis- 
ordered, and her resolution failed her so 
•entirely, that, unable to proceed, she rested 
on a bank beside the path, where, as she sat, 
the wind that groaned sullenly among the 
lofty branches above, seemed to her melan- 
choly imagination to bear the sounds of dis- 
tant lamentation, and in the pauses of the 
ffust she still fancied she heard the feeble and 
lar-oflf notes of distress. Attention convinced 
her that this was no more than fancy * but the 
increasing gloom, which seemed the sudden 
dose of day, soon warned her to depart, and 
with faltering steps she again moved towards 
the cottage. Through the casement appeared 
the cheerful blaze of a wood fire, and Theresa, 
who had observed Emily approaching, was 
already at the door to receive her. 

• It IS a cold evening, madam,' said she ; 
'storms are coming on, and I thought you 
would like a fire. Do take this chair by the 
hearth.* 

Emily, thanking her for this consideration, 
sat down ; and then looking in her face, on 
yhich the wood fire threw a gleam, she was 
struck with its expression, and, unable to 
speak, sunk back in her chftir with a coun- 
tenance so full of woe that Theresa instantly 
comprehended the occasion of it, but she re- 
mained silent. • Ah I* said Emily at length, 
* jt Is unnecessary for me to ask the result of 
yotirinquiry— your silence and that look suf- 
fKaendy explain it ;— he is dead !' 

'Alas I my dear yotrag lady/ replied The- 



resa, while tears filled her eyes, * this world is 
made up of trouble ;' the rich have their share 
as well as the poor ! But we must endeavour 
to bear what heaven pleases.' 

'He is dead, then!' interrupted E^nily: 
' Valancourt is dead 1' 

• A-well-a-day I I fear he is,' replied 
Theresa. 

• You fear I ' said Emily ; ' do you only fear ?* 

' Alas ! yes, madam, I fear he is ! neither 
the steward nor any of the Epourville family 
have heard of him since he left Languedoc ; 
and the count is in great affliction about him, 
for he says he was always punctual in writing, 
but that he now has not received a line from 
him since he left Languedoc ; he appointed to 
be at home three wee)^ ago, but he has neither 
come nor written, and they fear some accident 
has befallen him. Alas 1 tliat I should ever 
cry for his death 1 I am old, and might have 

died without being missed ; but he' Emily 

was faint, and asked for some water ; and 
Theresa, alarmed by the voice in which she 
spoke, hastened to her assistance ; and while 
she held the water to Emily's lips, continued : 
' My dear young mistress, do not take it so to 
heart ; the chevalier may be alive and weU, 
for all this ; let vs hope the best !' 

' O no I I cannot hope,' said Emily; ' I am 
acquainted with circumstances that will not 
suffer me to hope. I am somewhat better now, 
and can hear what you have to say. Tell me, 
I entreat, the particulars of what you know.' 

•Stay till you are a little better: made- 
moiselle, you look sadly I' 

• O no, Theresa, tell me all, while I have 
the power to hear it,' said Emily ; • tell me 
all, I conjiu-e you !' 

' Well, madam, I will then ; but the steward 
did not say much ; for Richard says he seemed 
shy of talking about Monsieur Valancourt, 
and what he gathered was from Gabriel, one 
of the servants, who said he had heard it from 
my lord's gentleman.' 

• What did he hear ?' said Emily. 

'Why, madam, Richard has but a bad 
memory, and could not remember half of it ; 
and if I had not asked him a great many 
questions, I should have heard little indeed. 
But he says that Gabriel said that he and all 
the other servants were in great trouble about 
M. Valancourt, for that he was such a kind 
young gentleman, they all loved him as well 
as if he had been their own brother — ^and now, 
to think what was become of him ! For he 
used to be so comteous to them all ; and if 
any of them had been in fault, M. Valancourt 
was the first to persuade my lord to forgive 
them. And then, if any poor family was in 
distress, M. Valancourt was the first, too, to 
relieve them, though some folks, not a g^eat 
way off, could have afforded that better than 
be. And then, said Gabriel, he was so gentle 
to everybody, and for all he had such a noble 
look with him, he never wouki command, and 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. t3|| 

call about him, as some of your quality stand what had been said. 'Aye, my dear 

people do. and we never minded him the lady,' said Theresa, mistaking the meaning of 

less for that. Nay, says Gabriel, for that this considerate air, ' M. Valancourt may be 

matter, we minded him the more, and would alive and merry yet' 

all have run to obey him at a word, sooner On the repetiUon of these words fimily com- 
than if some folks had told us what to do at prehended their import, but instead of pro- 
full length ; aye, and were more afraid of dis- ducing the eifect intended, they seemed only 
pleasing him, too, than of them that used to heighten her distress. She rose hastily 
rough words tons.' from her chair, paced the little room with 

Emily, who no longer considered it to be quick steps, and often sighing deeply, dasped 

dangerous to listen to praise bestowed on her hands, and shuddered. 

Valancourt, did not attempt to interrupt Meanwhile, Theresa, with simple but honest 

Theresa, but sat attentive to her words, though affection, endeavoured to comfort her: put 

almost overwhelmed with grief. more wood on the fire, stirred it up into a 

' My lord,' continued Theresa, ' frets about brighter blaze, swept the hearth, set the c)iairt 

M. Valancourt sadly ; and the more, because which Emily had left, in a warmer situation, 

they say he had been rather harsh against him and then drew forth from a cupboard a flask 

lately. Gabriel said he had it from my lord's of wine. ' It is a stormy night, madam,' said 

valet, that M. Valancourt had comported him- she, ' and blows cold — do come nearer the 

self wildly at Paris, and had spent a great fire, and take a glass of this wine : it will 

deal of money, more a great deal than my comfort you, as it has done me often and 

lord liked, for he loves money better than M. often, for it is not such wine as one gets 

Valancourt, who had been led astray sadly, every day ; it is rich Languedoc, and the last 

Nay, for that matter, M. Valancourt had of six flasks that M. Valancourt sent me the 

been put into prison at Paris, and my lord, night before he left Gascony for Paris. iTicy 

says Gabriel, refused to take him out, and have served me ever since as cordials ; and I 

said he deserved to suffer ; and when old never drink it, but I think of him, and what 

Gregoire, the butler, heard of this, he actually kind words he said to me when he gave them, 

bought a walking-stick to take with him to "Theresa," says he, "you are not young 

Paris, to visit his young master ; but the next now, and shoula have a glass of good Wine 

thing we hear is, that M. Valancomt is coming now and then. I will send you a few flasks ; 

home. O, it was a joyful day when he came ! and when you taste them, you will sometimes 

but he was sadly altered, and my lord looked remember me your friend.' Yes — those were 

very cool upon him, and he was very sad in- his very words — " me, your friend 1'" Etmily 

deed. And soon after, he went away again still paced the room, without seeming to hear 

into Languedoc, and since that time we have what Theresa said, who continued speaking, 

never seen him. ' ' And I have remembered him often enough. 

Theresa paused ; and Emily, sighing deeply, poor young gentleman !— for he gave me mis 

remained with her eyes fixed upon the floor, roof for a shelter, and that which has supported 

without speaking. After a long pause, she in- me. Ah ! he is in heaven with my blessed 

quu^what further Theresa had heard. 'Yet master, if ever saint was ?* 

why should I ask?* she added: 'what you Theresa's voice faltered ; she wept, and set 

have already told is too much. O Vakn- down the flask, unable to poiu* out the ^^e. 

court ! thou art gone — for ever gone I and I Her grief seemed to recall Emily from her 

— I have murdered thee !' These words, and own, who went towards her, but then stopped, 

the countenance of despair which accom- and, having gazed on her for a moment, 

panied them, alarmed Theresa, who began to turned suddenly away, as if overwhelmed by 

fear that the shock of the intelligence Emily the reflection that it was Valancourt whom 

had just received had affected her senses. Theresa lamented. 

•My dear young lady, be composed,' said .While she yet paced the room, the stiil soft 

she, • and do not say such frightful words, note of an oboe, or flute, was heard mingling 

You murder M. Valancomt ! — dear heart !' with the blast, the sweetness of which affected 

Emily replied only by a heavy sigh. Emily's spirits ; she paused a moment in at- 

' Dear lady, it breaks my heart to see you tention. The tender tones, as they swelled 

look so,' said Theresa : * do not sit with your along the wnd, till they were lost again \A the 

eyes upon the ground, and all so pale and ruder gusti came with a plaintiveness th^t 

melancholy; it frightens me to see you.' touched her heart, and she melted into tears. 

Emily was still silent, and did not appear to 'Aye,' said Theresa, drying her eyes, 'there 

hear anything that was said to her. ' Besides, is Richard,, our neighbours son, pkiying 

mademoiselle,'continued Theresa, 'M.Valan- on the oboe; it is sad enough to '^hear 

court may be alive and merry yet, for what we such sweet music now.' Emily continiiisd to 

know.' weep without repljring. 'He often plajrs of 

At the mention of his name Emily raised an evening,' added Theresa, 'and sometimes 

her eyes, and fixed them in a wild gaze upon the young folks danoo to the sound of his 

Theresa, as if she was endeavouring to imder- oboe. But, dear young lady \ dp not cry so ; 



i3fi 



THE MYSTBRIBS OP ODOLPHO. 



and pray take a glass of this wine.' continued 
she, pouring some into a glass, and handing 
it to Emily, who reluctantly took it. 

* Taste it for M. Valancourt's sake,' said 
llieresa, as Emily lifted the glass to her lips ; 
•for he gave it me, you know, madam.* 
Emily's hand trembled, and she spilt the wine 
as she withdrew it from her lips. 

'For whose sake?— who gave the wine?' 
said she in a faltering voice. 

' M. Valancourt, dear lady : I knew you 
would be pleased with it It is the last nask 
I have lefL^ 

Emily set the wine upon the table, and 
burst into tears ; while Theresa, disappointed 
and alarmed, tried to comfort her ; but she 
only waved her hand, entreated she might be 
left alone, and wept the more. 

A knock at the cottage-door prevented 
Theresa from immediately obeying her mis- 
tress ; and she was going to open it, when 
Emily, checking her, requested she would not 
admit anv person ; but afterwards recollect- 
ing that soe had ordered her servant to attend 
her home, she said it was only Philippe, and 
endeavoured to restrain her tears, while 
Theresa opened the door. 

A voice that spoke without drew Emily's 
attention. She listened, turned her eyes to 
the door, when a person now Appeared ; and 
hnmediately a bright gleam that flashed from 
the fire, discovered — ^Vadancourt ! 
. Emily, on perceiving him, started from her 
.chair, trembled, and, sinking into it again, 
became insensible to all around her. 

A scream from Theresa now told that she 
knew Valancourt, whom her imperfect sight 
and the duskiness of the place had prevented 
her from immediately recollecting ; but his 
attention was immediately called from her to 
the person whom he saw falling from a chair 
near the fire ; and hastening to her assistance 
— he perceived that he was supporting Emily ! 
The various emotions that seized him upon 
thus unexpectedly meeting with her, from whom 
he had believed he had parted for ever, and 
on beholding her pale and lifeless in his arms 
— may, perhaps, be imagined, though they 
could neither be then expressed nor now 
described, any more than Emily's sensations, 
when at length she unclosed her eyes, and, 
looking up, again saw Valancourt. The in- 
tense anxiety with which he regarded her was 
instantly changed to an expression of mingled 

i' *oy and tenderness, as his eyes met hers, and 
le perceived that she was reviving. But he 
could only exclaim, • Emily I' as he silently 
. watched her recovery, while she averted her 
' eye, and feebly attempted to withdraw her 
hand ,* but in these the first moments which 
succeeded to the pangs his supposed death 
h^ occasioned her, she forgot every fe.ult 
which had formeriy claimed indignation ; and 
beholding Valancourt such as he had appeared 
When itt won her early affection, she ex- 



perienced emotions of only tenderness and 
joy. This, alas ! was but the sunshine of a 
few short moments ; recollections rose like 
clouds upon her mind, and, darkening the 
illusive image that possessed it, she again 
beheld Valancourt degraded — Valancourt un- 
worthy the esteem and tenderness she had 
once bestowed upon him : her spirits faltered ; 
and withdrawing her hand, she turned from 
him to conceal her grief, while he, yet . more 
embarrassed and agitated, remained silent. 

A sense of wl^t she owed to herself 
restrained her tears, and taught her soon to 
overcome, in some degree, the emotions of 
mingled joy and sorrow that contended at 
her heart as she rose, and, having thanked 
him for the assistance he had given her, bade 
Theresa good evening. As she was leaving 
the cottage, Valancourt, who seemed suddenly 
awakened as from a dream, entreated, in a 
voice that pleaded powerfully for compassion, 
a few moments* attention. Emily's heart, 
perhaps, pleaded as powerfully ; but she had 
resolution enough to resist both, together 
with the clamorous entreaties of Theresa, 
that she would not venture home alone in the 
dark ; and had already opened the cottage- 
door, when the pelting storm compelled her to 
obey their requests. 

Silent and embarrassed she returned to the 
fire, while Valancourt, with increasing agita- 
tion, paced the room, as if he wished yet 
feared to speak, and "Theresa expressed with- 
out restraint her joy and wonder upon seeing 
him. 

' Dear heart ! sir,' said she, * I never was 
so surprised and overjoyed in my life. We 
were in great tribulation before you came, for 
we thought you was dead, and were talldng 
and lamenting about you just when you 
knocked at the door. My young mistress 
there was crying, fit to break her heart -' 

Emily looked with much displeasure at 
Theresa ; but, before she could speak, Valan- 
court, unable to repress the emotions which 
Theresa's imprudent discovery occasioned, ex- 
claimed, ' O my Emily ! am I then still dear 
to you? Did you, indeed, honour me with a 
thought — 2l tear ? O heavens ! you weep— 
you weep now !' 

' Theresa, sir,' said Emily with a reserved 
air, and trying to conquer her tears, * has 
reason to remember you with gratitude, and 
she was concerned because she had not ^tely 
heard of you. Allow me to thank you for 
the kindness you have shown her, and to say, 
that since I am now upon the spot, she must 
not be further indebted to you. ' 

' Emily 1' said Valancourt, no longer master 
of his emotions, ' is it thus you meet him 
whom once you meant to honour with your 
hand — thus you meet him, who has loved you, 
suffered for you ? — Yet what do I say ? Pardon 
me, pardon me, Mademoiselle St. Aubert, I 
know not what I utter. I have no longer any 



THB MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 137 

claim upon your remembrance — I have for- Emily made no reply, for she heard not 

feited every pretension to your esteem, your what was said, while, lost in sorrow and 

love. Yes ! let me not forget that I once thought, she remained in her chair by the 

possessed your affections, though to know fire, with her eyes fixed, and the miageof 

that I have lost them is my severest affliction. Valancourt still before them. 

Affliction — do I call it? — that is a term of M. Valancourt is sadly altered! madam,* 

mildness.' said Theresa ; ' he looks so thin to what he 

* Dear heart !' said Theresa, preventing used to do, and so melancholy, and then he 
Emily from replying, 'talk of once having wears his arm in a sling.' 

her affections ! Why, my dear young lady Emily raised her eyes at these words, for 

loves you now better than she does any body she had not observed this last circumstance, 

in the whole world, though she pretends to and she now did not doubt that Valancourt 

deny it.' had received the shot of her gardener at 

' This is unsupportable I' said Emily ; ThoiJouse : with this conviction, her pity for 

* Theresa, you know not what you say. Sir, him returning, she blamed herself for having 
if you respect my tranquillity, -you will spare occasioned him to leave the cottage during 
me from the continuance of this distress. ' the storm. 

* I do respect your tranquillity too much. Soon after, her servants arrived with the 
voluntarily to interrupt it,' replied Valancourt, carriage ; and Emily having censured Theresa 
in wl^ose bosom pride now. contended with for her thoughtless conversation to Valancourt 
tenderness ; ' and will not be a voluntary in- and strictly charging her never to repeat any 
truder. I would have entreated a few mo- hints of the same kind to him, withdrew to 
ments' attention — yet I know not for what her home, thoughtful and disconsolate, 
purpose. You have ceased to esteem me ; Meanwhile Valancourt had returned to a 
and to recount to you my sufferings will de- little inn of the village, where he had arrived 
grade me more, without exciting even your only a fewmomentsbrforehisvisit to Theresa's 
pity. Yet I have been, O Emily ! I am in- cottage, on the way from Thoulouse to the 
deed very wretched ! added Valancourt in a chateau of the Count de Duvamey, where he 
voice that softened from solemnity into grief.' had not been since he bade adieu to Eniily at 

'What ! is my dear young master going out Chateau-le-Blanc, in the neighbourhood of 
in all this rain ?' said Theresa. ' No, he shall which he had lingered for a considerable time, 
not stir a step. Dear ! dear ! to see how unable to summon resolution enough to quit 
gentlefolks can afford to throw away their a place that contained the object most dear to 
happiness ! Now, if you were poor people, his heart. TTiere were times, indeed, when 
there would be none of this. To talk of un- grief and despair urged him to appear again 
worthiness, and not caring about one another, before Emily, and, regardless of his rtdned 
when I know there are not such a kind- circumstances, to renew his suit. Pride, how- 
hearted lady and eentleman in the whole ever, and the tenderness of his affection, 
province, nor any tnat love one another so which could not long endure the thought of 
well, if the truth was spoken ! ' involving her in his misfortunes, at length so 

Emily in extreme vexation, now rose from far triimiphed over passion, that he relin- 
her chair : * I must be gone,' said she, ' the quished this desperate design, and quitted 
storm is over.' Chateau-le-Blanc. But still his fancy wan- 

• Stay, Emily ! stay Mademoiselle St. Aubert !' dered among the scenes which had witnessed 
said Valancourt, summoning all his resolution ; his early love ; and on his way to Gascon^ he 

• I will no longer distress you by my presence, stopped at Thoulouse, where he remained 
Forgive me, that I did not sooner obey you, when Emily arrived, concealing, yet indulging, 
and, if you can, sometimes pity one, who in his melancholy in the gardens where he had 
losing you — has lost all hope of jwace ! May formerly passed with her so many happy 
you be happy, Emily, however wretched I hours ; often recurring with vain regret to the 
remain — happy as my fondest wish would evening before her departure for Italy, when 
have you ! ' she had so unexpectedly met him on the ter- 

His voice faltered with the last words, sind race, and endeavouring to recall to his memory 
his countenance changed, while, with a look every word and look which had then charmed 
of inefifkble tenderness and grief, he gazed him, the arguments he had employed to dis- 
upon her for an instant, and then quitted the suade her from the journey, and the tender- 
cottage, ness of their last farewell. In such melan- 

' Dear heart ! dear heart ! ' cried Theresa, choly recollections he had been indulging, 

following to the door, * why, Monsiem* Valan- when Emily unexpectedly appeared to him on 

court ! how it rains ! what a night is this to this very terrace, the evening after her arrival 

turn him out in ! Why it will give him his at Thoulouse. His emotions, on thus seeing 

death ; and it was but now you was crying, her, can scarcely be imagined ; but he so far 

Mademoiselle, because he was dead. Well ! overcame the first promptings of love, that 

young ladies do change their mind in a he forbore to discover himself, and abruptly 

minute, as one may say !' . (juitted the ^rdpns. Still, b9W9ver| tb? 



138 THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO, 

vision he had seen haunted his mind ; he she received no answer, and saw him no 

l)ecanie more wretched tiian before ; and the more. 

©nly solace of his sorrow was to return in the 

silence of the night, to follow the paths which 

he believed her steps had pressed during the CHAPTER LII 
day, and to watch round the habitation where 

she reposed. It was in on6 of these mourn- * Call up him that left half-told ^ 

ful wanderings that he had received by the The story of Cambuscan bold, 

fire of the gardener, who mistook him for a Mn.TON. 

robber, a wound in his arm, which had de- On the following morning, as Emily sat in the 

tained him at Thoulouse, till very lately, under parlour adjoining the library, reflecting on 

the hands of a surgeon. There, regardless the scene of the preceding night, Annette 

of himself and careless of his friends, whose rushed wildly into the room, and without 

late unkindness had urged him to believe that speaking, sunk breathless into a chair. It 

they were indifferent as to his fate, he re- was some time before she could answer 

mamed, without informing them of his situa- the anxious inquiries of Emily, as to the 

tion.; and now, being sufficiently recovered occasion of her emotion ; but at length she 

to bear travelling, he had taken La Valine in exclaimed, ' I have seen his ghost, madam, 

his way to Estuviere, the count's residence, I have seen his ghost ! ' 

partly for the purpose of hearing of Emily, ' Whom do ybu mean?* said Emily with ex- 

find of being again near her, and partly for treme impatience. 

that of inquiring into the situation of poor • It came in from the hall, madam,' con- 
old Theresa, who he had reason to suppose tinned Annette, • as I was crossing to the 
had' been deprived of her stipend, smaU as it parlour.' 

was, and which inquiry had brought him to ' Whom are you speaking of?* repeated 
her cottage when Emily happened to be Emily — ' Who came in from the hall ?* 

there. ' It was dressed just as I have seen him. 

This unexpected interview, which had at often and often,' added Annette. * Ah ! who 

opce shown him the tenderness of her love could have thought ' 

and the strength of her resolution, renewed Emily's patience was now exhausted ; and 

all the acuteness of the despair that had at- she was reprimanding her for such idle fancies, 

tended their former separation, and which no when a servant entered the room, and informed 

efibr^ of reason could teach him, in these her that a stranger without begged leave to 

moments, to subdue. Her image, her look, speak with her. 

the tones of her voice, all dwelt on his fancy, It immediately occurred to Emily that this 

as powerfully as they had lately appeared to stranger was valancourt, and she told the 

his senses, and banished from his heart every servant to inform him that she was engaged, 

emotion except those of love and despair. and could not see uny person. 

Before the evening concluded, he returned The servant having delivered his message, 

tp Theresa's cottage, that he might hear her returned with one from thie stranger, urging 

talk of Emily, and be in the place where she the first request, and saying that he had 

had . so lately been. The joy felt and ex- something of consequence to communicate ; 

pressed by that faithful servant was quickly while Annette, who had hitherto sat silent and 

changed to sorrow, when she observed, at one amazed, now started up, and crying, * It is 

moment, his wild and phrensied look, and, at Ludovico ! — it is Ludovico I ' ran out of the 

another, the dark melancholy that overhung room. Emily bade the servant follow her, 

him. and, if it really was Ludovico, to show him 

After he had listened, and for a consider- into the parlour, 
able time, to all she had to relate concerning In a few minutes Ludovico appeared, ac- 

Emily, he gave Theresa nearly all the money companied by Annette, who, as joy rendered 

he had about him, though she repeatedly re- her forgetful of all rules of decorum towards 

fused it, declaring that her mistress had amply her mistress, would not suffer any person to 

supplied her wants ; and then, drawing a ring be heard for some time but herself. Emily 

of value from his finger, he delivered it to her expressed siu"prise and satisfaction on seeing 

with a solemn charge to present it to Emily, Ludovico in safety; and the first emotions in- 

of whom he entreated, as a last favour, that creased, when he delivered letters from Count 

she would preserve it for his sake, and some- de Villefort and the Lady Blanche, informing 

times, when she looked upon it, remember the her of their late adventure, and of their present 

unhappy giver. situation at an inn among the Pyrenees, where 

Theresa wept as she received the ring, but they had been detained by the illness of Mons. 

it was more from sympathy than from any St. Foix and the indisposition of Blanche, 

presentinient of evil ; and before she could who added, that the Baron St. Foix was just 

rcplyr Valancourt abruptly left the cottage, arrived to attend his son to his chateau, where 

She followed him to the door, calling upon he would remain till the perfect recovery <rf 

bis name, and entreating him to return ; but his wounds, and then return to I^nguedoc, 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. x^ 

but that her father and herself proposed to be nette ; • and I dare say too, if the truth was 
at La Vall^ on the following day. She ad- known, you shook from head to foot.' ' Not 
ded, that Emily's presence would be expected quite so bad as that,' replied Ludovico smil- 
at the approaching nuptials, ami begged she ing ; ' but several times, as the wind whistled 
would be prepared to proceed in a few days round the castle and shook the old casements* 
to Chateau-le- Blanc. For an account of I did fancy I heard odd noises, and once of 
Ludovico's adventure she referred her to him- twice I got up and looked about me ; but. no- 
self ; and Emily, though much interested con- thing was to be seen except the grim figures 
ceniing the means by which he had disap- in the tapestry, which seemed to frown upon 
pcared from the north apartments, had the me as I looked at them. I had sat thus for 
forbearance to suspend the gratification of above an hour,' continued Ludovico, 'when 
her curiosity till he had taken some refresh- again I thought I heard a noise, and glanced 
ment, and had conversed with Annette, whose my eyes round the room to discover what it 
joy, on seeing him in safety, could not have came from ; bttt, not perceiving anything, I 
been more extravagant had he arisen from began to read again : and when I had finished 
the grave. the story I was upon, I felt drowsy and drop- 

Meanwhile, Emily perused again the letters ped asleep. But presently I was awakQned 
of her friends, whose expressions of esteem by the noise I had heard before, and it seined 
and kindness were very necessary consolations to come from that part of the chamber where 
to her heart, awakened as it was by the late in- the bed stood ; and then, whether it was the 
terview to emotions of keener sorrow and regret, story I had been reading that ifiTected my spirits, 
The invitation to Chateau -Ic- Blanc was or the strange reports that had been spread 
pressed with so much kindness by the count <rf these apartments, I don't know ; but when 
and his daughter, who strengthened it by a I looked towards the bed again, I fancied I 
message from the countess, and the occasion saw a man's face within the dusky curtains.' • 
of it was so important to her friend, that At the mention of this Emily trembled and 
Emily could not refuse to accept it ; nor, looked anxiously, remembering the spectacle 
though she wished to remain in the quiet she had herself witnessed there with Doro- 
shades of her native home, could she avoid thee. ; . 

perceiving the impropriety of remaining * I confess, madam, my heart did foil me . 
there alone since Valancourt was again in at that instant,' continued Ludovico; but d re*- 
the neighbourhood. Sometimes, too, she turn of the noise drew my attention from the 
thought that change of scenery and the bed, and I then distinctly heard a sound like 
society of her friends might contribute more that of a key turning in a lock ; but what sur- 
than retirement, to restore her to tranquillity, prised me more was, that I saw no door where 
When Ludovico again appeared, she de- the sound seemed to come from. In the neat- 
sired him to give a detail of his adventure in moment, however, the arras near the bed was 
the north apartments, and to tell by what slowly lifted, and a person appeared behind 
means he became a companion of the ban- it, entering from a small door in the wall. He 
ditti, with whom the count had found him. stood for a moment as if half-retreating, with 
He immediately obeyed ; while Annette, his head bending under the arras, which <Joii.i 
who had not yet had leisure to ask him many cealed the upper part of his face, except his 
questions on the subject, prepared to listen eyes scowling beneath the tapestry as hfe held 
with a countenance of extreme curiosity, ven- it ; and then, while he raised it higher, I saw 
turing to remind her lady of her incredulity the face of another man behind, looking over 
concerning spirits in the castle of Udolpho, his shoulder. I know not how it was, but, 
and of her own sagacity in believing in them ; though my sword was upon the table before 
while Emily, blushing at the consciousness of me, I had not the power just then to seize it, • 
her late credulity, observed that, if Ludovico's but sat quite still, watching them with my eyes 
adventure could justify Annette's superstition, half-shut, as if I was asleep. I suppose they . 
he had probably not been here to relate it. thought me so, and were debating what thejr 
Ludovico smiled at Annette, and bowed to should do ; for I heard them whisper, and 
Emily, and then began as follows : they stood in the same posture for the value- 

' You may remember, madam, that on the of a minute, and then I thought I perceived . 
night when I sat up in the north chamber, my other faces in the duskiness beyond the d6or, 
lord the count and Mons. Henri accompanied and heard loudea* whispers.' 
me thither, and that while they remained there ' This door surprises me,' said Emily, 'bfr? ■ 
nothing happened to excite any alarm. When cause I understood that the count had caused 
they were gone I made a fire in the bed-room, the arras to be lifted, and the walls examimd^ 
and not being inclined to sleep, I sat down on suspecting that they might have concealed a 
the hearth with a book I had brought with passage through whicdi you had departed.' 
me to divert my mind. I confess I did some- ' It does not appear so extraordinary to 
times look round the chamber with something me, madam,' replied Ludovicoj 'that this 

like apprehension ' door should escape notice, because it was 

• O very like it, I dare say,' interrupted An- formed in a narrow oompartmeiU which ap- 



I40 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHQ, 

pearad to be part of the outward wall ; and if many years secreted their spoil in the vaults 

the count had not passed over it, he might have of the castle, which, being near the sea, 

thought it was useless to search for a door suited their purpose well. To prevent de- 

where it seemed as if no passage could com- tection, they had tried to have it believed 

municate with one ; but the truth was, that that the chateau was haunted ; and having 

the passage was formed within the wall itself, discovered the private way to the north 

But to return to the men whom I saw obscurely apartments, which had been shut up ever 

beyond the door, and who did not suffer me since the death of the lady marchioness, they 

to remain long in suspense concerning their easily succeeded. The housekeeper and her 

design. They all rushed into the room, and husband, who were the only persons that had 

surroimded me, though not before I had inhabited the castle for some years, were so 

snatched up my sword to defend myself. But terrified by the strange noises they heard in 

what could one man do against four ? They the nights, that they would live there no 

soon disarmed me, and, having fastened my longer. A report soon went abroad that it 

anns and gagged my mouth, forced me was haunted ; and the whole countiy believed 

throttgh the private door, leaving my sword this the more readily, I suppose, because it 

upon the table, to assist, as they said, those had been said that the lady marchioness had 

who should come in the morning to look for died in a strange way, and because my lord 

me, in fighting against the ghosts. They then never would return to the place afterwards.' 

led me through many narrow passages, cut, ' But why,' said Emily, • were not these 

as I iiancied in the walls, for I luid never seen pirates contented with the cave? — why did 

them before, and down several flights of steps, they think it necessary to deposit their spoil 

till we came to the vaults tmderneath the in the castle ?' 

castle ; and then opening a stone door, which ' The cave, madam,' replied Ludovico, * was 
I should have taken for the wall itself, we open to anybody, and their treasures would 
went through a long passage, and down other not long have remained undiscovered there ; 
steps cut in the solid rock, when another door but in the vaults they were secure so long as 
dt^vered us into a cave. After turning and the report prevailed of then: being haunted, 
twining about for some time, we reached the Thus, then, it appears that they brought at 
mouth of it, and I found myself on the sea- midnight the spoil they took on the seas, and 
b<»ch at the foot of the cHffs, with the chateau kept it till they had opportunities of disposing 
above. A boat was in waiting, into which the of it to advantage. The pirates were con- 
ruffians got, forcing me along with them, and nected with Spanish smugglers and banditti 
we soon reached a small vessel that was at who live among the wilds of the Pyrenees, 
anchor, where other men appeared, when, and carry on various kinds of traffic, such as 
setting me aboard, two of the fellows who nobody would think of; and with this des- 
had seized me followed, and the other two perate horde of banditti I remained till my 
rowed back to the shore while we set sail. I lord arrived. I shall never forget what I felt 
soon found out what all this meant, and what when I first discovered him — ^I almost gave 
was the business of these men at the chateau, him up for lost ; but I knew that if I showed 
We landed in Roussillon ; and after lingering myself, the banditti would discover who he 
several days about the shore, some of their was, and probably murder us all, to prevent 
comrades came down from the mountains, their secret in the chateau being detected. I 
and carried me with them to the fort, where I therefore kept out of my lord's sight, but had a 
remained'till my lord so unexpectedly arrived ; strict watch upon the ruffians, and determined, 
for they had taken good care to prevent my if they offered him or his family violence, to 
mnning away, having blindfolded me during discover myself and fight for our lives. Soon 
the journey ; and if they had not done this, I after, I overheard some of them laying a most 
thinik I never could have found my road to ■ diabolical plan for the murder and plunder of 
any town through the wild country we tra- the whole party ; when I contrived to speak 
versed. After I reached the fort, I was watched to some of my lord's attendants, telling them 
like a prisoner, and never suffered to go out what was going forward, and we consulted 
without two or three companions, and I be- what was best to be done. Meanwhile, my lord, 
came so weary of life that I often wished to alarmed at the absence of the Lady Blanche, 
get rid of it.' demanded her; and the ruffians having given 

* Well, but they let you talk,' said Annette ; same unsatisfactory answer, my lord and 
' they did not jg^g you after they got you away Mons. St. Foix became furious ; so then we 
from the chateau, so I don't see what reason thought it a good time to discover the plot : 
there was to be so very weary of living ; to say and, rushing into the chamber, I called out 
nothing about the chance of seeing me again.* Treachery ! — My lord count, defend yourself! 

Liidavico smUed, and Emily also, who in- His lordship and the chevalier drew their 

quired what was the motive of these men for swords directly, and a hard battle we had ; 

carnring him off. but we conquered at last, as, madam, you are 

• I' soon foimd out, madam, resumed Ludo- already informed of by my lord count.* 

vico, *uiax tbsy were pirates, who had during ' This is an extraordinary adventure,* said 



tHB MYSTERIMS OP VDOLPHO. 



Ui 



£mi1y, 'and much praise is due, Ludovico, to ' I have reason to believe, madam,' replied 
your prudence and intrepidity. There are some Ludovico, ' tliat it was their intention to per- 
circumstances. however, concerning the north severe no longer than was necessaiy for the 
apartments which still perplex me ; but per- removal of the stores which were deposited in 
haps you may be able to explain them. Did the vaults ; and it appeared that they had 
you ever hear the banditti relate anything ex- been employed in doing so from within a short 
traordinary of these rooms ?* I>eriod after the count's arrival ; but as they had 

• No, madam,' replied Ludovico ; * I never only a few hours in the night for this busmess, 
heard them speak about the rooms, except to and were carrying on o&er schemes at the 
laugh at the credulity of the old housekeeper, same time, the vaults were not above half 
who once was very near catching one of the emptied when they took me away. They 
pirates ; it was since the count arrived at the gloried exceedingly in this opportunity of con- 
chateau,' he said ; and he laughed heartily as finning the superstitious reports diat had been 
he related the trick he had played off. spread of the north chambers, were careful to 

A blush spread over Emily's cheek, and she leave everything there as they had found it, 
impatiently desired Ludovico to explain himself, the better to promote the deception ; and fre- 

• Why, my lady,' said he, • as this fellow quently in their jocose moods would laugh at 
was one night in the bed-room, he heard some- the consternation which they believed the in- 
body approaching through the next apart- habitants of the castle had suffered upon my 
ment ; and not having time to lift up the arras disappearing ; and it was to prevent the pos- 
and unfasten the door, he hid himself in the sibility of my betraying their secret that they 
bed just by. There he lay in aS great a fright, had removed me to such a distance. From 
I suppose ' that period they considered the chateau as 

•As you was in, 'interrupted Annette, 'when nearly their own ; but I found from the dis- 
you sat up so boldly \6 watch by yourself. ' course of their comrades that, though they 

• Aye,' said Ludovico, ' in as great a fright were cautious at first in showing their power 
as he ever made anybody else suffer: and there, they had once very nearly betrayed 
presently the housekeeper and some other themselves. Going one night, as was their 
person came up to the bed ; when he, think- custom, to the north chamber to repeat the 
ing they were going to examine it, bethought noises that had occasioned such alarm among 
him, that his only chance of escaping de- tlie servants, they heard, as they were about 
tection was by terrifying them ; so he lifted to unfasten the secret door, voices in the bed- 
up the counterpfane ; but that did not do, room. My lord has since told me that him- 
till he raised his face above it ; and then they self and M. Henri were then in the apart- 
1x)th set off,' he said, ' as if they had seen the ment, and they heard very extraordinary 
devil ; and he got out of the rooms undis- sounds of lamentation, which it seems were 
covered.' made by these fellows, with their usual de- 
Emily could not forbear smiling at this ex- sign of spreading terror ; and my lord has 

planation of the deception which had given her owned he then felt somewhat more than sur- 



so much superstitious terror, and was surprised 
that she could have suffered herself to be thus 
alarmed, till she considered that, when the 
mind has once begun to yield to the weakness 
of superstition, trifles impress it with the force 
of conviction. Still, however, she remem- 



prise ; but as it was necessary to the peace of 
his family that no notice should be taken, he 
was silent on the subject, and enjoined silence 
to his son.' 

Emily, recollecting the change that had ap- 
peared in the spirits of the count, after the night 



bered with awe the mysterious music which when he had watched in the north room, now 

had been heard at midnight near Chateau-le- perceived the cause of it ; and having made 

Blanc, and she asked Ludovico if he could some further inquiries upon this strange affair, 

give any explanation of it ; but he could not. she dismissed Ludovico, and went to give 

* I only know, madam,' he added, ' that it orders for the accommodation of her friends 

did not belong to the pirates ; for I have heard on the following day. 

them laugh about it, and say they believed In the evening, Theresa, lame as she was, 

the devil was in league with them there. ' came to deliver the ring with which Valan- 



'Yes, I will answer for it he was,' said 
Annette, her countenance brightening ; ' I was 
sure all along that he or his spirits Iwd some- 



court had intrusted her ; and when she pre- 
sented it, Emily was much affected, for she 
remembered to have seen him wear it often in 



thing to do with the north apartments, and happier days. She was, however, much dis- 

uow you see, madam, I am right at last.' pleased that Theresa had received it, and 

• It cannot be denied that his spirits were positively refused to accept it herself, though 

very busy in that part of the chateau,' replied to have done so would have afforded her a 

Emily smiling. ' But I am surprised, Ludo- melancholy pleasure. Theresa entreated, ex- 

vicOj that these pirates should persevere in postulated, and then described the distress of 

their schemes after the arrival of the count ; Valancourt when he had given the ring, and 

what could they expect but certain detec- repeated the message with which he had com- 

tion?' missioned her to deliver it ; and Emily could 



j^j THE MVSTMRISS OF UDOLPHO. 

not conceal the extreme sorrow this recital and which she frequently wished to regain, 

occasioned her, but wept, and remained lost because St. Aubert had lamented that the 

fa AouKht chief lands of his ancestors had passed mto 

' Alas I my dear young lady 1' said Theresa, another family, and because they had been his 

•why should all this be? I have known you birth-place and the haunt of his early years, 

from your infancy, and it may weU be sup- To the estate at Thoulouse she had no par- 

Dosed I love you as if you was my own, and ticular attachment, and it was her wish to 

Jdsh as much to see you happy. M. Valan- dispose of this, that she might purchase her 

court, to be sure, I have not known so long, paternal domains, if M. Quesnel could be 

but then I have reason to love him as though prevailed on to part with them, which, as I19 

he was my own son. I know how weU you talked much of hving m Italy, did not appear 

love one another, or why all this weeping and very improbable. 

wailing?* Emily waved her hand for Theresa 

to be silent, who. disregarding the signal, 
continued : ' And how much you are alike in 

your tempers and ways, and that, if you were CHAPTER LIIL 

married, you would be the happiest couple in « g^^^j .^ ^^it breath of vernal shower, 

the whole province— then what is there to pre- The bees' collected treasures sweet, 

vent your marrying? Dear, dear I to see how Sweet music's melting fall, but sweeter yet 

some people fling away their happiness, and The still small voice of gratitude.' . 

then cry and lament about it, just as if it was Orky. 

not their own doing, and as if there was more On the followhig day, the arrival of her friend 

pleasure in wailing and weeping than in being revived the drooping Emily, and La Valine 

at peace. Learning, to be sure, is a fine became once more the scene of social kindness 

thing ; but if it teaches folks no better than and of elegant hospitality. Illness and the 

that, why I had rather be without it; if it terror she had suffered had stolen from 

would teach them to be happier, I would say Blanche mudi of her sprightliness, but all her 

something to it ; then it would be learning affectionate simplicity remained, and though 

and wisdom too.' she appeared less blooming, she was not less 

Age and long services had given Theresa a engaging than before. The unfortunate ad- 
privilege to talk ; but Emily now endeavoured venture on the Pyrenees had made the count 
to check her loquacity, and, though she felt very anxious to reach home *, and after a little 
the justness of her remarks, did not choose to more than a week's stay at La Vallfee, Emily 
explain the circumstances that had determined prepared to set out with her friends for Lan- 
her conduct towards Valancourt. She there- guedoc, assigning the care of her house, dur- 
fore only told Theresa that it would much ing her absence, to Theresa. On the evening 
displease her to hear the subject renewed ; preceding her departure, this old servant 
that she had reasons for her conduct which brought again the ring of Valancourt, and, 
she did not think it proper to mention ; and with tears, entreated her mistress to receive it, 
that the ring must be returned, with an as- for that she had neither seen nor heard of M. 
surance that she could not accept it with pro- Valancourt since the night when he delivered 
priety ; and at the same time she forbade it to her. As she said this, her countenance 
Theresa to repeat any future message from expressed more alarm than she dared to utter ; 
Valancourt, as she valued her esteem and but Emily, checking her own propensity to 
kindness. Theresa was afflicted, and made fear, considered that he had probably returned 
another attempt, though feeble, to interest to the residence of his brother, and, again re- 
her for Valancourt ; but the unusual dis- fusing to accept the ring, bade Theresa pre- 
pleasure expressed in Emily's countenance serve it till she saw him ; which with extreme 
soon obliged her to desist, and she departed reluctance she promised to do. 
in wonder and lamentation. On the following day. Count de Villefort, 

To relieve her mind, in some degree, from with Emily and the Lady Blanche, left La 
the painful recollections that intruded upon Valine, and on the ensuing evening arrived at 
it, Emily busied herself in preparations for the the Chateau-le- Blanc, where the Countess, 
journey into Languedoc ; and while Annette, Henri, and M. du Pont, whom Emily was 
who assisted her, spoke with joy and affection surprised to find there, received them with 
of the safe return of Ludovico, she was con- much joy and congratulation. She was con- 
sidering how she might best promote their cemed to observe that the count still encour- 
happiness, and determined, if it appeared aged the hopes of his friend, whose counten- 
that his affection was as unchanged as that of ance declared that his affection had suffered 
the simple and honest Annette, to give her a no abatement from absence ; and was much 
marriage-portion, and settle them on some distressed, when, on the second evening after 

Eart of her estate. These considerations led her arrival, the count, having withdrawn her 

er to the remembrance of her father's pa- from the Lady Blanche, with whom she was 

temal domain, which his affairs had formerly walking, renewed the subject of M. du Font's 

compelled him to dispose of to M. Quesnel, hopes. The mildness with which she listened 



THE MYSTERIBS OP UDOLPHO. 



«43 



to his intercourses at first, deceiving him as to 
her sentiments, he began to believe that, her 
affection for Valancourt being overcome, she 
was at length disposed to think favourably of 
M. du Pont ; and, when she afterwards con- 
vinced him of his mistake, he ventured, in the 
earnestness of his wish to promote what he 
considered to be the happiness of two persons 
whom he so much esteemed, gently to remon- 
strate with her on thus suffering an ill-placed 
affection to poison the happiness of her most 
valuable years. 

Observing her silence and the deep dejection 
of her countenance, he concluded with saying, 
' I will not say more now, but I will still 
believe, my dear Mademoiselle St. Aubert, 
that you will not always reject a person so 
truly estimable as my friend Du Pont.' 

He spared her the pain of replying by 
leaving her; and she strolled on, somewhat 
displeased with the count for having perse- 
vered to plead for a suit which she had repeat- 
edly rejected, and lost amidst the melancholy 
recollections which this topic had revived, till 
she had insensibly reached the borders of the 
woods that screened the monastery of St. 
Clare, when perceiving how far she had wan- 
dered, she determined to extend her walk a 
little further, and to inquire after the abbess 
and some of her friends among the nuns. 

Though the evening was now drawing to a 
close, she accepted the invitation of the friar 
who opened the gate, and, anxious to meet 
some of her old acquaintance, proceeded to- 
wards the convent parlour. As she crossed 
the lawn that sloped from the front of the 
monastery towards the sea, she was struck 
with the picture of repose exhibited by some 
monks sitting in the cloisters, which extended 
under the brow of the woods that crowned 
this eminence ; where, as they meditated, at 
this twilight hour, holy subjects, they some- 
times suffered their attention to be reheved by 
the scene before them, nor thought it profane 
to look at nature, now that it had exchanged 
the brilliant colours of the day for the sot)er 
hue of evening. Before the cloisters, however, 
spread an ancient chestnut, whose ample 
branches were designed to screen the full 
magnificence of a scene that might tempt the 
wish to worldly pleasures ; but still, beneath 
the dark and spreading foliage, gleamed a 
wide extent of ocean, and many a passing 
sail ; while, to the right and left, thick vroods 
were seen stretching along the winding shores. 
So much as this had been admitted, perhaps, 
to give to the secluded votary an image of the 
dangers and vicissitudes of life, and to console 
him now that he had renounced its pleasures 
by the certainty of having escaped its evils. As 
Emily walked pensively along, considering 
how much suffering she might have escaped 
had she become a votaress of the order, and 
remained in this retirement from the time of 
her father's death^ the vesper-bell struck up, 



and the monks retired slowly toward the 
chapel ; while she, pursuing her way, entered 
the great hall, where an unusual silence 
seemed to reign. The parlour, too, which 
opened from it, she found vacant ; but, as the 
evening bell was sounding, she believed the 
nuns had withdrawn into the chapel, and sat 
down to rest for a moment before she returned 
to the chateau, where, however, the increasing 
gloom made her now anxious to be. 

Not many minutes had elapsed, before a 
nun, entering in haste, inquired for the abbess, 
and was retiring without recollecting Emily, 
when she made herself known, and then 
learned that a mass was going to be performed 
for the soul of sister Agnes, who had been 
declining for some time, and who was now 
believed to be dying. 

Of her suffenngs the sister gave a melan- 
choly account, and of the horrors into which 
she had frequently started, but which had now 
yielded to a dejection so gloomy, that neither 
her prayers, in which she was joined by the 
sisterhood, nor the assurances of her confessor, 
had power to recall her from it, or to cheo* 
her mind even with a momentary gleam of 
comfort. 

To this relation Emily listened with extreme 
concern ; and recollecting the phrensied man- 
ners and the expressions of horror which she 
had herself witnessed of Agnes, together with 
the history that sister Frances had communi- 
cated, her compassion was heightened to a 
very painful degree. As the evening was 
already far advanced, Emily did not now 
desire to see her, or to join in the mass ; and 
after leaving many kind remembrances with 
the nun for her old friends, she quitted the 
monastery, and returned over the cliffs toward 
the chateau, meditating upon what she had 
just heard, till at leng& she forced her mind 
upon less interesting subjects. 

The wind was high ; and as she drew near 
the chateau, she often paused to listen to its 
awful sound as it swept over the billows that 
beat below, or groaned along the surrounding 
woods ; and while she rested on a cliff a short 
distance from the chateau, and looked upon 
the wide waters seen dimly beneath the last 
shade of twilight, she thought of the following 
address 

TO THE WINDS. 

Viewless, through heaven's vast vault your 
course ye steer, ^ * 

Unknown from whence ye come, or whither go. 
Mysterious powers I I hear you murmur low, 
Till swells your Ic^d gust on my startled ear. 
And, awful, seems to say — Some god is near I 
I love to list your midnight voices float 
In the dread storm, that o'er the ocean rolls. 
And, while their charm the angry wave controls, 
Mix with its sullen roar, and smk remote. 
Then, rising in the pause, a sweeter note, 
The dirge of spirits, who your deeds bewail, 
A sw^ter note ofi swells while sleeps the §ale. 



Z44 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 



But soon, ye sightless powers, your rest is o'er ; 
Solemn and slow, ye rise upon the air, 
Speak in the shrouds, and bid the sea-boy fear, 
And the faint-warbled dirge is heard no more. 

Oh ! then I deprecate your awful reign. 
The loud lament yet bear not on your breath : 
Bear not the crash of bark far on the main. 
Bear not the cry of men, who cry in vain. 
The crew's dread chorus sinking into death ; 
Oh I give not these, ye powers 1 I ask alone. 
As rapt I climb these dark romantic steeps. 
The elemental war, the billow's moan : 
I ask the still, sweet tear, that listening Fancy weeps. 



CHAPTER LIV. 

*....."'... Unnatural deeds 
Do breed unnatural troubles : infected minds 
To their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets. 
More needs she the divine, than the physician. 

Macbeth. 

On the following evening, the view of the 
convent towers rising among the shadowy 
woods, reminded Emily of Sie nun whose 
condition had so much affected her; and 
anxious to know how she was, as well as to 
see some of her former friends, she and the 
Lady Blanche extended their walk to the 
monastery. At the gate stood a carriage, 
which, from the heat of the horses, appeared 
to have just arrived ; but a more than common 
stillness pervaded the court and the cloisters 
through which Emily and Blanche passed in 
their way to the great hall, where a nun, who 
was passing to the staircase, replied to the in- 
quiries of the former, that sister Agnes was 
still living and sensible, but that it was thought 
she could not survive the night. In the par- 
lour they found several of the boarders, who 
rejoiced to see Emily, and told her many little 
circumstances that had happened in the con- 
vent since her departure, and which were in- 
teresting to her only because they related to 
persons whom she had regarded with affection. 
While they thus conversed, the abbess entered 
the room, and expressed much satisfaction at 
seeing Emily ; but her manner was unusually 
solemn, and her countenance dejected. ' Our 
house, 'said she, after the first salutations 
were over, ' is truly a house of mourning — a 
daughter is now paying the debt of nature. — 
You have heard, perhaps, that our daughter 
Agnes is dying?' 

Emily expressed her sincere concern. 

' Here death presents to us a great and 
awful lesson,' continued the gbbess ; 'let us 
read it, and profit by it ; let it teach us to 
prepare ourselves for the change that awaits 
us all I You are young, and have it in your 
power to secure " the peace that passeth all 
understanding " — the peace of conscience. 
Preserve it in your youth, that it may comfort 
you in age ; for vain, alas ! and imperfect are 
the goo4 deeds of our latter years, if those pf 
pi^j: early life have been evU I' 



Emily would have said that good deeds, 
she hoped, were never vain ; but she con- 
sidered that it was the abbess who spoke, and 
she remained silent 

'The latter days of Agnes,' resumed the 
abbess, 'have been exemplary; would thqr 
might atone for the errors of her former ones I 
Her sufferings now, alas I are great ; let us 
believe that they will make her peace here- 
after ! I have left her with her confessor, 
and a gentleman whom she has long beoi 
anxious to see, and who is just arrived from 
Paris. They, I hope, will be able to adminis- 
ter the repose which her mind has hitlK^o 
wanted. ' 

Emily fervently joined in the wish. 
* During her illness she has sometimes 
named you,' resumed the abbess ; ' perhaps 
it would comfort her to see you ; when her 
present visitors have left her, we will go to her 
chamber, if the scene will not be too melan- 
choly for your spirits. But, indeed, to such 
scenes, however painful, we ought to accus- 
tom oiu"selves, for they are salutary to the 
soul, and prepare us for what we are ourselves 
to suffer.' 

Emily became grave and thoughtfiil ; for 
this conversation brought to her recollection 
the dying moments of her beloved &ther. and 
. she wished once more to weep over the spot 
where his remains were buried. During the 
silence which followed the abbess's speech, 
many minute circumstances atten(Mng his last 
hours occvured to her — his emotion on per- 
ceiving himself to be in the neighbourhood of 
Chateau-le-Blanc — his request to be interred 
in a particular spot in the church of this 
monastery — and the solemn charge he had . 
delivered her, to destroy certain pap>ers with- 
out examining them.— She recollected al§o 
the mysterious and horrible words in those 
manuscripts, upon which her eye had in- 
voluntarily glanced ; and though they now, 
and indeed whenever she remembered them, 
revived an excess of painful curiosity concern- 
ing their full import and the motives for her 
father's command, it was ever her chief con- 
solation that she had strictly obeyed him in 
this particular. 

Little more was said by the abbess, who 
appeared too much affected by the subject she 
had lately left to be willing to converse, and 
her companions had been for some time silent 
from the same cause ; when this general reverie 
was interrupted by the entrance of a stranger, 
Monsieur Bonnac, who had just quitted the 
chamber of sister Agnes. He appeared much 
disturbed, but Emily fancied that his counten- 
ance had more the expression of horror than 
of grief. Having drawn the abbess to a dis- 
tant part of the room, he conversed with her 
for some time, during which she_ seemed to 
listen with earnest attention, and he to speak 
with caution and a more than common degree 
of interest. When Jie ba4 cpijcjuded^ h^ 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPHO. X45 

bowed silently to the rest of the company, Agnes sunk down apparently lifeless, and 
and qtutted the room. The abbess, soon Emily, unable to support herself, leaned 
after, proposed going to the chamber of sister against the bed, while the abbess and the 
Agnes ; to which Emily consented, though attendantnunwereapplyingthe usual remedies 
notwithout some reluctance, and Lady Blanche to Agnes. 'Peace,' said the abbess, when 
remained with the boarders below. Emily was going to sp^ik ; ' the delirium is 

At the door of the chamber they met the going off ; she will soon revive. When was 
confessor, whom, as he lifted up his head on she thus before, daughter ?' 
their approach, Emily observed to be the ' Not of many weeks, madam,' replied the 
same that had attended her dying father ; but nun : ' but her spirits have been much agitated 
he passed on without noticing her, and they by the arrival of the gentleman she wished so 
entered the apartment, where, on a mattress, much to see.' 

was laid sister Agnes, with one nun watching ' Yes,' observed the abbess, ' that has un- 
in the diair beside her. Her countenance doubtedly occasioned this paroxysm of phrensy. 
was so much changed that Emily would When she is better, we will leave her to re- 
scarcely have recollected her, had she not pose.' 

been prepared to do so ; it was ghastly, and Emily very readily consented ; but, though 
overspread with gloomy horror ; her dim and she could now give little assistance, she was 
hollow eyes were fixed on a crucifix which she unwilling to quit the chamber while any might 
held upon her bosom ; and she was so much be necessary. 

engaged in thought, as not to perceive the When Agnes recovered her senses, she again 
abbess and Emily till they stood at the bed- fixed her eyes on Emily ; but their void ex- 
side. Then, turning her heavy e^es, she fixed pression was gone, and a gloomy melancholy 
them, in wild horror, upon Emily ; and, had succeeded. It was some moments before 
screaming, exclaimed, ' Ah 1 that vision comes she recovered sufficient spirits to sp^^ : she 
upon me in my dying hours !' then said feebly, ' The likeness is wonderful 1 

Emily started back in terror, and looked for — surely it must be something more than 
explanation to the abbess, who made her a fancy. Tell me, I conjure you,' she added, 
signal not to be alarmed ; and calmly said to addressing Emily, ' though your name is St. 
Agnes, ' Daughter, I have brought Made- Aubert, are you not the daughter of the 
moiselle St. Aubert to visit you; I thought marchioness?' 

you would be glad to see her.' ' What marchioness?* said Emily in extreme 

Agnes made no reply ; but still gazing surprise ; for she had imagined, from the 
vnldly upon Emily, exclaimed, ' It is her very calmness of Agnes's manner, that her intel- 
self ! Oh I there is all that fascination in her lects were restored. The abbess gave her a, 
look which proved my destruction ! What significant glance, but she repeated the ques- 
would you have? — ^what is it you come to tion. 

demand ? — Retribution ? It will soon be ' What marchioness ?' exclaimed Agnes ; 

yours — it is yours already. How many years * I know but of one — ^the Marchioness de 
have passed since last I Saw you ! My crime Villeroi.' 

is but as yesterday. — ^Yet I am growTi old Emily, remembering the emotion of her 
beneath it ; while you are still young and late father upon the unexpected mention of 
blooming — blooming as when you forced me. this lady, and his request to be laid near to 
to commit that most abhorred deed ! Oh I the tomb of the Villerois, now felt greatly in- 

could I onde forget it ! yet what would terested, and she entreated Agnes to explain 

that avail? — the deed is done 1' the reason of her question. The abbess 

Emily, extremely shocked, would now have would now have wijhdravm Emily from the 
left the room ; but the abbess, taking her room, who being, however, detained by a 
hand, tried to support her spirits, and begged strong interest, repeated her entreaties, 
she would stay a few moments, when Agnes ' Bring me that casket, sister,' said Agnes : 
would probably be calm, whom now she pied ' I will show her to you : yet you need only 
to soothe. But the latter seemed to disregard look at that mirror, and you will behold her ; 
her, while she still fixed her eyes on Emily, you surely are her daughter ; such striking 
and added, ' What are years of prayers and resemblance is never found but among near 
rei^ent^nce? they cannot wash out die foul- relations.' 

ness of murder ! ^YeS, murder ! Where is The nun brought the casket ; and Agnes 

he — where is he ? — Look there — ^look there — having directed her how to unlock it, she took 
see where he stalks along the room I Why thence a miniature, in which Emily perceived 
do you come to torment me now ?' continued the exact resemblance of the picture which 
Agnes, while her straining eyes were bent on she had found among her late father's papers, 
air : 'why was not I punished before ?— Oh I Agnes held out her hand to receive it ; gaaed 
do not frown so sternly I Hah ! there again ! upon it earnestly for some moments in silence ; 
'tis she herself! Why do you look so piteously and then, with a countenance of deepdespair, 
upon me— and smite me, too ? Smile on me ! threw up her eyes to heaven, and prayed in- ; 
What grpan vfts that (>' wsircily. WhQn s^ie ))ad fin|s2KKli sh^ retursed 



146 



THE MYSTERIES OP, UDOLPHO. 



the miniature to Emily. * Keep it,' said she ; 
' I bequeath it to you, for I must believe it is 
your right I have frequently observed the 
resemblance between you ; but never, till this 
day, did it strike upon my conscience so 
powerfully f Stay, sister, do not remove the 
casket — ^tnere is another picture I would 
show.' 

Emily trembled with expectation, and the 
abbess again would have withdrawn her. 
' Agnes is still disordered,' said she ; ' you ob- 
serve how she wanders. In these moods she 
sa3rs an3rthing, and does not scruple as you 
have witnessMl, to accuse herself of the most 
horrible crimes.' 

Emily, however, thought she perceived 
something more than madness in the incon- 
sistencies of Agnes, whose mention of the 
marchioness, and production of her picture, 
had interested her so much, that she deter- 
mined to obtain further information, if pos- 
sible, respecting the subject of it. 

The nun retiuned with the casket ; and 
Agnes pointing out to her a secret drawer, she 
took from it another miniature. ' Here,' 
said Agnes, as she offered it to Emily, ' learn 
a lesson for your vanity, at least ; look well 
at this picture, and see if you can discover 
any resemblance betweeii what I was and 
what I am.' 

Emily impatiently received the miniature, 
which her eyes had scarcely glanced upon, 
before her trembling hands had nearly suffered 
it to fall — it was the resemblance of the por- 
trait of Signora Laurentini, which she had 
formerly seen in the castle of Udolpho— -the 
lady who had disappeared in so mysterious a 
manner, and whom Montoni had been sus- 
pected of having caused to be murdered. 

* Why do you look so sternly on me ?' said 
Agnes, mistaking the nature of Emily's emo- 
tion. 

• I have seen this face before,' said Emily at 
length ; ' was it really your resemblance ?' 

*You may well ask that question,' replied 
the nun — ' but it was once esteemed a striking 
likeness of me. Look at me well, and see 
what guilt has made me. I then was inno- 
cent ; the evil passions of my nature slept. ' 
• Sister I' added she solemnly, and stretching 
forth her cold damp hand to Emily, who 
shuddered at its touch — 'Sister! beware of 
the first indulgence of the passions ; beware 
of the first ! Tlieir course, if not checked 
then, is rapid — their force is uncontrollable — 
they lead us we know not whither — they lead 
us perhaps to the commission of crimes, for 
which whole years of prayer and penitence 
cannot atone!— Such may be the force of 
even a single passion, that it overcomes every 
other, and sears up every other approach to 
the heart. Possessing us like a fiend, it leads 
us on to the acts of a fiend, making us insen- 
sible to pity and to conscience. And when 
iU jmtpaso i3 accomplished, like a fiend it 



leaves ns to the torture of those feelings whidi 
its power had suspended — not annihilated — ^to 
the tortures of compassion, remorse, and coa- 
science. Then, we awaken as from a dream, 
and perceive a new world around us— we gaze 
in astonishment and horror — ^but the deed is 
committed ; not all the powers of heaven and 
earth united can undo it — and the spectres 
of conscience wiU not fly I What are riches — 
grandeiu: — ^health itself, to the luxury of a pure 
conscience, the health of the soul ; — and 
what the sufferings of poverty, disappoint- 
ment, despair — to the anguish of an afflicted 
one I Oh I how long is it since I knew that 
luxury I I believed that I had suffered the 
most agonising pangs of human nature, in 
love, jealousy and despair — ^but these pangs 
were ease compared with the stings of con- 
science which I have since endured. I tasted 
too what was called the sweet of revenge — 
but it was transient, it expired even with the 
object that provoked it. Remember, sister, 
that the passions are the seeds of vices as wdl 
as of virtues, from which either may spring, 
accordingly as they are nurtured. Unhappy 
they who have never been taught the art to 
govern them !' 

' Alas ! unhappy !' said the abbess, ' and ill- 
informed of our holy religion I' Emily listened 
to Agnes in silent awe, while she still examined 
the miniature, and became confirmed in her 
opinion of its strong resemblance to the por- 
trait of Udolpho. * This face is familiar to 
me,' said she, wishing to lead the nun to an 
explanation, yet fearing to discover too ab- 
ruptly her knowledge of Udolpho. 

' You are mistaken,' replied Agnes ; * you 
certainly never saw that pictiu-e before.' 

' No, replied Emily ; • but I have seen one 

extremely like it' • Impossible,' said ^^g^nes, 

who may now be called the Lady Laurentini. 

' It was in the castle of Udolpho,' continued 

Emily, looking steadfastly at her. 

* Of Udolpho?* exclaimed Laurentini : • of 
Udclpho in Italy ?' ' The same, ' replied Emily. ' 
' You know me then,' said Laurentini, • and 
you are the daughter of the marchioness.' 
Emily was somewhat surprised at this abrupt 
assertion. ' I am the daughter of the late 
Mons. St Aubert,' said she ; 'and tbe lady 
you name is an utter stranger to me.' 

' At least you believe so, ' rejoined Laurentini. 
Emily asked what reasons there could be 
to believe otherwise. 

' The family-likeness that you bear her, * said 
the nun. ' Ine marchioness, it is known, was 
attached to a gentleman of Gascony, at the 
time when she accepted the hand of the 
marquis by the command of her father. Ill- 
fated, unhappy woman I' 

Emily remembering the extreme emotion 
which St. Aubert had betrayed on the men- 
tion of the marchioness, would now have 
suffered something more than surprise, hAd 
her confidence in his integrity been less ; as it 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 147 

Was, she could not iat Sl tnoment believe what and perplexed with doubts by some words 

the words of Lauren tini insinuated ; yet she from the nun, that she was unable to converse, 

still felt strongly interested concerning them, and would have left the convent immediately, 

and begged that she would explain them further, had she not wished to know whether Lauren- 

' Do not urge me on that subject,' said the tini would survive the late attack. After wait> 

nun, ' it is to me a terrible one 1 Would that ing some time, she was informed that, the 

I could blot it from my memory ! ' She sighed convulsions having ceased, Laurentini seemed 

deeply, and, after the pause of a moment, to be reviving ; and Emily and Blanche were 

asked Emily by what means she had dis- departing, when the abbess appeared, who. 

covered her name. drawing the former aside, said she had some* 

' By your portrait in the castle of Udolpho, thing of consequence to say to her, but as it 

to which this miniature bears a striking re- was late, she would not detain her then, and 

semblance,' replied Emily. requested to see her on the following day. 

'You have been at Udolpho, then?' said Emily promised to visit her, and, having 

the nun with great emotion. ' Alas i what taken leave, returned with the Lady Blanche 

scenes does the mention of it revive in my towards the chateau, on the way to which the 

fancy — scenes of happiness— of suffering — and deep gloom of the woods made Blanche lament 

of horror 1 ' that the evening was so far advanced ; for the 

At this moment the terrible spectacle which surrotmding stillness and obscurity rendered 
Emily had witnessed in a chamber of that her sensible of fear, though there was a ser- 
castle occurred to her ; and she shuddered vant to protect her ; while. Emily was too 
while she looked upon the nun — and recol- much engaged by the horrors of the scene she 
lected her late words — that years of prayer had just witnessed, to be affected by the 
and penitence could not wash out the foulness solemnity of the shades, otherwise than as 
of murder. She was now compelled to attri- they served to promote her gloomy reverie, 
bute these to another cause than that of from which, however, she was at length re- 
delirium. With a degree of horror that al- called by the Loidy Blanche, who pointed out 
most deprived her of sense, she now believed at some distance m the dusky path they were 
she looked upon a murderess. All the recol- winding, two persons slowly advancing. It 
lected behaviour of Laurentini seemed to was impossible to avoid them without striking 
confirm the supposition ; yet Emily was still into a still more secluded part of the wood, 
lost in a labyrinth of perplexities, and, not whither the strangers might easily follow; 
knowing how to ask the questions which but all apprehension vanished when Emily 
might lead to truth, she could only hint thpm distinguished the voice of Mons. du Pont, 
in broken sentences. and perceived that his companion was the 

' Your sudden departure from.pdolpho,' — gentleman whom she had seen at the monas- 

said she. tery, and who was now conversing with so 

Laurentini groaned. much earnestness as not immediatdy to per- 

The reports that followed it, continued ceive their approach. When Du Pont joined 

Emily — 'The west chamber — the mournful veil the ladies, the stranger took leave ; and they 

— the object it conceals 1 — When murders are proceeded to the chateau, where the count, 

committed ' when he heard of Mons. Bonnac, claimed 

The nun shrieked. ' What 1 therie again 1' him for an acquaintance, and, on learning the 

said she, endeavouring to raise herself, while melancholy occasion of his visit to Lai^e- 

her starting eyes seemed to follow some ob- doc, and that he was lodged at a small inn in 

ject round the room — ' Come from the grave — the villapfe, begjg^ed the favour of Mons. du 

What 1 Blood — blood too 1 — There was no Pont to mvite him to the chateau, 

blood-^thou canst not say it 1 — Nay, do not The latter was happy to do so : and the 

smile, — do not smile so piteously 1 ' scruples of reserve which made M. Bonnac 

Laurentini fell in to convulsions as she uttered hesitate to accept the invitation being at length 

the last words ; and Emily, unable any longer overcome, they went to the chateau, where 

to endure the horror of the scene, hurried the kindness of the count and the spright- 

from the room, and sent some nuns to the as- liness of his son were exerted to dissipate the 

sistance of the abbess. gloom that overhungthe spirits of the stranger. 

The Lady Blanche and the boarders who M. Bonnac was an officer in the French ser- 

were in the parlour now assembled round vice, and appeared to be about fifty ; his 

Emily, and, alarmed by her manner and figure was tall and commanding, his manners 

affrighted countenance, asked a hundred ques- had received the last polish, and there was 

tions, which she avoided answering further, something in his countenance uncommonly 

than by saying that she believed sister Agnes interesting ; for over features which in youth 

was dying. 'They received this as a sufficient must have been remarkably handsome, was 

explanation of her terror ; and had then leisure spread a melancholy that seemed the effect of 

to offer restoratives, which at length some- long misfortune, rather than of constitution 

what revived Emily, whose mind was, how- or temper. 

ever, to much shocked with terrible surmises. The conversation he held during supper 



148 THE MYSTHRtES OP VD0LPH6. 

was evidently aft effort of politeness, and there appear so much affected now as on the pre- 
were intervals in which, unable to struggle ceding evening, immediately after quitting the 
against feelings that depressed him, he re- apartment of the nun, whose death was pro- 
lapsed into silence and abstraction ; from bably less terrible to him than the confession 
which, however, the count sometimes with- he had been then called upon to witness. 
drew him in a manner so delicate and benevo- However this might be, he was perhaps con- 
lent, that Emilv, while she observed him, soled, in some degree, by a knowledgeof the 
almost fancied she beheld her late father. legacy bequeathed him, since his family was 

The party separated at an early hour ; and lai^, and the extravagance of some part of it 
then, in the solitude of her apartment, the had lately been the means of involving him in 
scenes which Emily had lately witnessed re- great distress, and even in the horrors of a 
turned to her fancy with dreadful energy, prison ; and it was the grief he had suffered 
That in the dying nun she should have dis- from the wild career of a favourite son, with 
covered Signora Laurentini, who instead of the pecuniary anxieties and misfortunes con- 
having been murdered by Montoni, was, as sequent upon it, that had given to liis coun- 
it now seemed, herself guilty of some dreadful tenance the air of dejection which had so 
crime, excited both horror and surprise in a much interested Emily, 
high degree ; nor did the hints which she had To his friend Mons. du Pont he recited 
dropped respecting the marriage of the Mar- some particulars of his late sufferings, when 
chioness de Villeroi, and the inquiries she had it appeared that he had been coimned for 
made concerning Emily's birth, occasion her several months in one of the prisons of Paris, 
a less degree of interest, though it was of a with little hope of release, and withorit the 
different nature. comfort of seeing his wife, who had been ab- 

The history which sister Frances had for- sent in the country, endeavouring, though in 
merly related, and had said to be that of vain, to procure assistance from his friends. 
Agnes, it now appeared was erroneous ; but When, at length, she had obtamed an order 
for what piupose it had been fabricated, un- for admittance, she was so much shocked at 
less the more effectually to conceal the true the chaMge which long confinement and sor- 
story, Emily could not even guess. Above row had made in his appearance, that she was 
all, her interest was excited as to the relation seized with fits, which, by their long con- 
which the story of the late Marchioness de tinuance, threatened her life. 
Villeroi bore to that of her father ; for that * Our situation affected those who happened 
some kind of relation existed between them, to witness it,' contihued Mons. Bonnac : *and 
the grief of St. Aubert upon hearing her one generous friend, who was in confinement 
name, his request to be buried near her, and at the same time, afterwards employed the 
her picture which had been found among his first moments of his liberty in efforts to ob- 
papers, certainly proved. Sometimes it oc- tain mine. He succeeded ; the heavy debt 
curred to Emily that he might have been the that oppressed me was discharged ; and when 
lover to whom it was said the marchioness I would have expressed my sense of the obli- 
was attached, when she was compelled to gation I had received my benefactor was fled 
marry the Marquis de Villeroi ; but that he from my search. I have reason to believe he 
had afterwards cherished a passion for her, was the victim of his own generosity, and that 
she could not suffer herself to believe for a he returned to the state of confinement from 
moment. Thepaperswhichhe had so solemnly which he had released me; but every inquiry 
enjoined her to destroy, she now fancied had after him was unsuccessful. Amiable and 
related to this connexion ; and she wished unfortunate Valancourt !' 
more earnestly than before to know the rea- ' Valancourt !' exclaimed Mons. du Pont 
sons that made him consider the injunction ' Of what family ?' 

necessary, which, had her faith in his principles 'The Valancourts, Count Du^raimey,' re- 
been less, would have led her to believe that plied Mons. Bonnac. 

there was a mystery in her birth dishonour- The emotion of Mons. du Pont, when he 
able to her parents, which those manuscripts discovered the generous benefactor of his 
might have revealed. friend to be the rival of his love, can only be 

Reflections similar to these engaged her imagined ; but having overcome his first sur- 
mind during the greater part of the night ; prise, he dissipated the apprehension of Mons. 
and when at length she fell into a slumber, it Bonnac, by acquainting him that Valancourt 
•was only to behold a vision of the dying nun, was at liberty, and had lately been, in Lan- 
and to awaken in horrors like those she had guedoc ; after which his affection for Emily 
witnessed. prompted him to make some inquiries respect- 

On the following morning she was too much ing the conduct of his rival during his stay at 
indisposed to attend her appointment with Paris, of which M. Bonnac appeared to be 
the abbess, and before the day concluded she well informed. The answers he received were 
hwd that sister Agnes was no more. Mons. such as convinced him that Vajancourt had 
oonnac received this inielligence with con- been much misrepresented ; and painful as was 
ORTD / \mi Emily observed that he did not the sacrifice, he formed the just design of 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



X49 



relinquishing his pursuit of Emily, to a lover 
who, it now appeared, was not unworthy of 
the r^ard with which she honoured him. 

The conversation of M. Bonnac discovered 
that Valancourt, some time after his arrival at 
Paris, had been drawn into the snares which 
determined vice had spread for him ; and that 
his hours had been chiefly divided between 
the paities of the captivating marchioness, 
and those gaming assemblies to which the 
envy or the avarice of his brother-officers had 
spared no art to seduce him. In these par- 
ties he had lost large sums in efforts to re- 
cover small ones, and to such losses the 
Count de Villefort and M. Henri had been fre- 
quent witnesses. His resources were at 
length exhausted ; and the count his brother, 
exasperated by his conduct, refused to con- 
tinue the supplies necessary to his present 
mode of life ; when Valancourt, in conse- 
quence of accumulated debts, was thrown 
into confinement, where his brother suffered 
him to remain, in the hope that punishment 
might effect a reform of conduct which had 
not yet been confirmed by long habit. 

In the solitude of his prison Valancourt had 
leisure for reflection and cause for repentance ; 
here, too, the image of Emily, which amidst 
the dissipation of the city had been obscured 
but never obliterated from his heart, revived, 
with all the charms of innocence and beauty, 
to reproach him for having sacrificed his hap- 
piness and debased his talents by pursuits 
which his nobler faculties would formerly 
have taught him to consider were as tasteless 
as they were degrading. But though his 
passions had been seduced, his heart was not 
depraved, nor had habit riveted the chains 
that hung heavily on his conscience ; and, as 
he retained that energy of will which was 
necessary to burst them, he at length emanci- 
pated himself from the bondage of vice, but 
not till after much effort and severe suffering. 

Being released by his brother from the 
prison where he had witnessed the affecting 
meeting between Mons. Bonnac and his wife, 
with whom he had been for some time ac- 
quainted, the first use of his hberty formed a 
striking instance of his humanity and his 
rashness ; for with nearly all the money just 
received from his brother, he went to a 
gaming-house, and gave it as a last stake for 
the chance of restoring his friend to freedom 
and to his afflicted family. The event was 
fortunate; and while he had awaited the 
issue of this momentous stake, he made a 
solemn vow never again to yield to the de- 
structive and fascinating vice of gaming. 

Having restored the venerable Mons. Bon- 
nac to his rejoicing family, he hurried from 
Paris to Estuviere ; and in the delight of 
having made the wretched happy, forgot for 
a while his own misfortunes. Soon, however, 
he remembered that he had thrown away the 
fortune without which he could never hope to 



marry Emily ; and life, unless passed with 
her, now scarcely appeared supportable ; for 
her goodness, refinement, and simplicity ot 
heart, rendered her beauty more enchanting, 
if possible, to his fancy than it had ever yet 
appeared. Experience had taught him to un- 
derstand the full value of the qualities which 
he had before admired, but which the con- 
trasted characters he had seen in the world 
made him now adore ; and these reflections 
increasing the pangs of remorse and regret, 
occasioned the deep dejection that had ac- 
companied him even into the presence of 
Emily, of whom he considered himself no 
longer worthy. To the ignominy of having 
received pecuniary obligations from the Mar- 
chioness Chamfort, or any other lady of in- 
trigue, as the Count de Villefort had been 
informed, or of having been engaged in the 
depredating schemes of gamesters, Valancourt 
had never submitted ; and these were some of 
such scandals as often mingle with truth 
against the unfortunate. Count de Villefort 
had received them from authority which he 
had no reason to doubt, and which the im- 
prudent conduct he had himself witnessed in 
Valancourt had certainly induced him the 
more readily to believe. Being such as Emily 
could not name to the chevadier, he had no 
opportunity of refuting them ; and when be 
had confessed himself to be unworthy of her . 
esteem, he little suspected that he was con- 
firming to her the most dreadful calunmies. 
Thus the mistake had been mutual, and had 
remained so, when Mons. Bonnac explained 
the conduct of his generous but imprudent 
yoimg friend to Du Pont ; who, with severe 
justice, determined not only to undeceive the 
count on this subject, but to resign all hope 
of Emily. Such a sacrifice as his love ren- 
dered this, was deserving of a noble reward ; 
and Mons. Bonnac, if it had been possible 
for him to forget the benevolent Valancourt, 
would have wished that Emily might accept 
the just Du Pont. 

When the count was informed of the error 
he had committed, he was extremely shocked 
at the consequence of his credulity ; and the 
account which Mons. Bonnacgave of his friend's 
situation while at Paris, convinced him that 
Valancourt had been entrapped by the schemes 
of a set of dissipated young men with whom 
his profession had partly obliged him to asso- 
ciate, rather than by an inclination to vice ; 
and, charmed by the humanity, and noble 
though rash generosity which his conduct 
towards Mons. Bonnac exhibitad, he forgave 
him the transient errors that had stained his 
youth, and restored him to the high degree of 
esteem with which he had regarded him during 
their early acquaintance. But as the last 
reparation he could now make Valancoart 
was to afford him an opportunity of explain- 
ing to Emily his former conduct, he imme- 
diately wrote to request his forgiveness of the 



ISO THE MYSTBRtBS OF UDOLPHO, 

unintentional injury he had done him, dnd to LAURENTINI DI UDOLPMO, 

invite him to Chateau-le- Blanc. Motives of who was the only child of her parents, and 

delicacy withheld the count from informmg heiress of the ancient house of Udolpho, in the 

£mily of this letter, and of kindness from ac^ territory of Venice. It was the first misfor- 

quainting her with the discovery respecting tune of her life, and that which led to sdl her 

Valancourt till his arrival should save her succeeding misery, that the friends who ought 

from the possibility of anxifety as to its event ; to have restrained her strong passions, and 

and this precaution spared her even severer mildly instructed her in the art of governing 

inquietude than the count had foreseen, since them, nurtured them by early indulgence. But 

he was ignorant of the symptoms of despair they cherished their own failings in her ; for 

which Valancourt's late conduct had be- their conduct was not the result of rational 

trayed. kindness ; and when they either indulged or 

opposed the passions of their child, they 

gratified their own. Thus they indulged her 

with weakness, and reprehended her with vio- 

rHAPTPP TV lence; her spirit was exasperated by their 

L.J-IAK1 t*K L.V. vehemence, instead of being corrected by their 

t B„t jn tijesg ^.jjggs wisdom ; and their oppositions became con- 

We still have judgment here ; that we but teach tests for victory, in which the due tenderness 
Bloody instructions, which, being taught, return of the parents, and the affectionate duties of 
To plague the inventor; thus even-handed Justice the child, were equally forgotten : but as re- 
Commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice tummg fondness disarmed the parents' resent- 
To our own lips. Macbeth ^^^^^ soonest, Laurentini was suffered to 

believe that she had conquered, and her pas- 

SOME circumstances of an extraordinary sions became stronger by every effort that had 

nature now withdrew Emily from her own been employed to subdue them, 

sorrows, and excited emotions which partook The death of her father and mother in •the 

of both surprise and horror. same year left her to her own discretion, under 

A few days following that on which Signora the dangerous circumstances attenc^t on 

I^aurentini died, her will was opened at the youth and beauty. She was fond of company, 

monastery, in the presence of the superiors delighted with admiration, yet disdainful of 

and Mons. Bonnac, when it was found that the opinion of the world, when it happened to 

one third of her personal property was be- contradict her indinations ; had a gay and 

queathed to the nearest surviving relative of brilliant wit, and was mistress of all the arts of 

the late Marchioness de Villeroi, and that fascination. Her conduct was such as might 

Emily was the person. have been expected from the weakness of her 

With the secret of Emily's family the abbess principles and the strength of her passions, 
had long been acquainted ; and it was in ob- Among her numerous admirers was the late 
servance of the earnest request of St. Aubert, Marquis de Villeroi, who, on his tour through 
who was known to the friar that attended him Italy, saw Laurentini at Venice, where he 
on his death-bed, that his daughter had re- usually resided, and became her passionate 
mained in ignorance of her relationship to the adorer. Equally captivated by the figure and 
marchioness. But some hints which had accomplishments of the marquis, who was at 
fallen from Signora Laurentini during her last that period one of the most distinguished 
interview with Emily, and a confession of a noblemen at the French court, she had the art 
very extraordinary nature given in her dying so effectually to conceal from him the danger- 
hours, had made the abbess think it necessary ous traits of her character, and the blemishes 
to converse with her young friend on the topic of her late conduct, that he solicited her hand 
she had not before ventured to introduce ; and in marriage. 

it was for this purpose that she had requested Before the nuptials were concluded, she re- 
to see her on the morning that followed her tired to the castle of Udolpho, whither the 
interview with the nun. Emily's indisposition marquis followed, and where her conduct, fe- 
had then prevented the intended conversation ; laxing from the propriety which she had lately 
but now, after the will had been examined, she assumed, discovered to him the precipice on 
received' a summons, which she immediately which he stood. A minuter inquiry than he 
obeyed, and became informed of circum- had before thought it necessary to make, con- 
stances that pdVverfully affected her. As the vinced him that he had been deceived in her 
narrative of the abbess was, however, deficient character ; and she, whom he had designed 
in many particulars of which the reader may for his wife, afterwards became his mistress, 
wish to be informed, and the history of the Having passed some weeks at Udolpho, he 
nun is materially connected with the fate of the was called abruptly to France, whither he re- 
Matchioness de Villeroi, we shall omit the turned with extreme reluctance, for his heart 
conversation that passed in the parlour of the was still fascinated by the arts of Laurentini, 
convent, and mingle with our relation a brief with whom, however, he had on various pre- 
history of tences delayed his marriage ; but, to reconcile 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPUO. . \S^ 

her to this separation, he now gave repeated of murdering the marquis, his wife, and her- 

promisesofretuming to conclude the nuptials, self. At lengtli she contrived to tlirow herself 
as soon as the affeir which thus suddenly in his way, with an intention of reproaching 

called him to France should permit. him for his conduct, and of stabbing herself in 

Soothed in some degree by these assurances, his presence ; but when she again saw him 

she suffered him to depart ; and soon after, who so long had been the constant object of 

her relative, Montoni, arriving at Udolpho, her thoughts and affections, resentment yielded 
renewed the addresses which she had before to love ; her resolution failed ; she trembled 

refused, and which she now again rejected, with the conflict of emotions that assailed her 

Meanwhile her thoughts were constantly with heart, and fainted away, 

the Marquis deVilleroi, for whom she suffered The marquis was not proof against her 

all the delirium of Italian love, cherished by beauty and sensibility ; all the energy with 

the solitude to which she confined herself ; for which he had first loved returned, for his pas- 
she had now lost all taste for the pleasures of sion had been resisted by prudence, rather than 

society and the gaiety of amusement Her overcome by indifference ; and since the 

only indulgences were to sigh and weep over honour of his family would not permit him to 

a miniature of the marquis ; to visit the marry her, he had endeavoured to subdue his 

scenes that had witnessed their happiness ; to love ; and had so far succeeded as to select 

pour forth her heart to him in writing; and to the then marchioness for his wife, whom he 

count the weeks, the days, which must inter- loved at first with a tempered and rational 

vene before the period that he had mentioned affection. But the mild virtues of that 

as probable i%x his return. But this period amiable lady did not recompense him for her 

passed without bringing him ; and week after indifference, which appeared, notwithstanding 

week followed in heavy and almost intolerable her efforts to conceal it ; and he had for some 

expectation. During this interval, Lauren- time suspected that her affections were en- 

tini's fancy, occupied incessantly by one idea, gaged by another person, when Laurentini 

became disordered ; and her whole heart arrived in Languedoc. This artful Italian 

being devoted to one object, life became soon perceived that she had regained her in- 

hateiul to her, when she believed that object fluence over him ; and, soothed by the dis- 

lost covery, she determined to live, and to employ 

Several months passed, during which she all her enchantments to win his consent to the 
heard nothing from the Marquis de Villeroi. diabolical deed, which she believed was neces- 
and her days were marked at intervals, wijh sary to the security of her happiness. She 
the frenzy of passion and the sullenness of conducted her scheme with deep dissimulation 
despair. She secluded herself from all visitors, and patient perseverance ; and haviqg com- 
and sometimes remained in her apartment for pletely estranged the affections of the marquis 
weeks together, refusing to speak to every from hi* wife, whose gentle goodness and un- 
person, except her favourite female attendant, impassioned manners had ceased to please, 
writing scraps of letfcrs, reading again and when contrasted with the captivations of the 
again those she had received from the marquis, Italian, she proceeded to awaken in his mind 
weeping over his picture, and speaking to it, the jealousy of pride, for it was no longer that 
for many hours, upbraiding, reproaching, and of love, and even pointed out to him the per- 
caressing it alternately. son to whom she affirmed the marchioness 

At length a report reached her that the mar- had sacrificed her honour ; but Laurentini 

quis had married in France ; and after suffer- had first extorted from him a solemn promise 

ing all the extremes of love, jealousy, and in- to forbear avenging himself upon his rival, 

dignation, she formed the desperate resolution This was an important part of her plan ; for 

of going secretly to that country, and, if the she knew that if his desire of vengeance was 

report proved true, of attempting a deep re- restrained towards one party, it would bum 

venge. To her favourite woman only she more fiercely towards the other, and he might 

confided the" plan of her journey ; and she en- then perhaps be prevailed on to assist in the 

gaged her to partake of it. Having collected horrible act, which would release him from the 

her jewels, which, descending to her from only barrier that withheld him from making 

many branches of her family, were of immense her his wife. 

value, and all her cash, to a very large amount, The innocent marchioness meanwhile ob- 

they were packed in a trunk, which was served with extreme grief the alteration in her 

privately conveyed to a neighbouring town, husband's manners. He became reserved and 

whither Laurentini, with this only servant, thoughtful in her presence ; his conduct was 

followed, and thence proceeded secretly to austere, and sometimes even rude ; and he 

Leghorn, where they embarked for France. left her, for many hours together, to weep for 

When, on her arrival in Languedoc, she his unkindness, and to form plans for the re- 
found that the Marquis de Villeroi had been covery of his affection. His conduct afflioted 
married for some months, her despair almost her the more, because in obedience to the 
deprived her of reason, and she nltornately command of her father she had accepted his 
projected and al»ndoned the horrible design hand, though her affections were engaged to 



IS9 . TlfE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

another whose amiable disposition she had him ever after, for which his most intimate 
reason to believe would have ensured her friend could not account ; and he at length 
happiness. This circumstance Laurentini had died, with a degree of horror nearly equal to 
discovered soon after her arrival in France, that which Laurentini had suffered. The phy- 
and had made ample use of it in assisting her sician, who had observed the singular appear- 
designs upon the marquis, to whom she ad- ance of the unfortunate marchioness after her 
duced such seeming proof of his wife's infi- death, had been bribed to silence ; and as the 
delity, that, in the frantic rage of wounded surmises of a few of the servants had proceeded 
honour, he consented to destroy his wife. A no further than a whisper, the affair had never 
slow poison was administered, and she fell a been investigated. Whether this whisper ever 
victim to the jealousy and subtlety of Lauren- reached the father of the marchioness, and 
tini, and to the guilty weakness of her hus- if it did, whether the difficulty of obtain- 
band. ing proof, deterred him from prosecuting the 

But the moment of Laurentini's triumph. Marquis de Villeroi, is uncertain ; but her 
the moment to which she had looked forward death was deeply lamented by some part of 
forthecompletionallofherwishes, proved only her family, and particularly by her brother, 
the commencement of a suffering that never M. St Albert ; for that was the de^ee of 
left her to her dying hour. relationship which had existed between Emily's 

The passion of revenge, which had in part father and the marchioness ; and there is no 
stimulated her to the commission of this doubt that he suspected the manner of her 
atrocious deed, died even at the moment when death. Many letters passed between the 
it was gratified, and left her to the horrors of marquis and him, soon after the decease of 
unavailing pity and remorse, which would pro- his beloved sister, the subject 'of whid^ was 
bably have impoisoned all the years she had not known, but there is reason to believe that 
promised herself with the Marquis de Villeroi, they related to the cause of her death ; and 
had her expectations of an alliance with him these were the papers, together with some 
been realised. But he, too, had found the of the letters of the marchioness, who had 
moment of his revenge to be that of remorse confided to her brother the occasion of her 
as to himself, and detestation as to the part- unhappiness, which St. Aubert had so so- 
ner of his crime ; the feeling which he had lemnly enjoined his daughter to destroy : and 
mistaken for conviction was no more ; and he anxiety for her peace had probably made him 
stood -iflstonished and aghast, that no proof forbid her to inquire into the melancholy story 
remained of his wife's infidelity, now that she to which they alluded. Such, indeed, had 
had suffered the punishment of guilt. Even been his affliction on the premature death of 
when he was informed that she was dying, this his favourite sister, whose unhappy mar- 
he had felt suddenly and unaccountably re- riage had from the first excited his tenderest 
assured of her innocence ; nor was th^ solemn pity, that he never could hear her named, or 
assurance she made him in her last hour mention her himself after her death, except to 
capable of affording him a stronger conviction Madame St. Aubert. From Emily, whose 
of her blameless conduct. sensibility he feared to awaken, he had so care- 

In the first horrors of remorse and despair, fully concealed her history and name, that she 
he felt inclined to deliver up himself, and the was ignorant, till now, that she ever had sudi 
woman who had plunged him into this abyss a relative as the Marchioness de Villeroi ; and 
of guilt, into the hands of justice ; but when from this motive he had enjoined silence to 
the paroxysm of his suffering was over, his his only surviving sister, Madame Cheron, 
intention changed. Laurentini, however, he who had scrupulously observed his request, 
saw only once afterwards, and that was to It was over some of the last pathetic letters 
curse her as the instigator of his crime, and to of the marchioness that St. Aubert was weep- 
say, that he spared her life only on condition ing when he was observed by Emily on the 
that she passed the rest of her days in prayer eve of her departure from La Vall^, and it 
and penance. Overwhelmed with disappoint- was her picture which he had so fondly ca- 
ment, on receiving contempt and abhorrence ressed. Her disastrous death may account 
from the man for whose sake she had not for the emotion he had betrayed on hearing 
scrupled to stain her conscience with human her named by La Voisin, and for his request 
blood, and touched with horror of the un- to be interred near the monument of the W- 
availing crime she had committed, she re- lerois, where her remains were deposited, but 
nounced the world, and retired to the monas- not those of her husband, who was buried, 
teryof St. Clair, a dreadful victim to unresisted where he died, in the north of France. 
passion. The confessor who attended St Aubert in 

The marquis, immediately after the death his last moments, recollected him to be the 
of his wife, quitted Chateau-le- Blanc, to which brother of the late marchioness, when St 
he ^ever returned, and endeavoured to lose Aubert, from tenderness to Emily, had con- 
the sense of his crime amidst the tumult of jured him to conceal the circumstance, and to 
war, or the dissipations of a capital. But his request that the abbess, to whose care he 
efforts were vain ; a deep dejection hung; over particularly recommended her^ would dg the 



TME MVSTBRIB^ OF UDOLPUO. 



m 



Sftme ; a request which had been exactly ob- recovery of her senses, that Emily was the 
served. daughter of the Marchioness de ViUeroi, arose 

Laurentini, on her arrival in France, had from suspicion that she was so; for, know- 
carefully concealed her name and family, and, ing that her rival, when she married the mar- 
the better to disguise her real history, bad, on quis, was attached to another lover, she had 
entering the convent, caused the story to be scarcely scrupled to believe that her honour 
circulated which had imposed on sister had been sacrificed, like her own, to an unre- 
Frances ; and it is probable that the abbess, sisted passion. 

who did not preside in the convent at the Of a crime, however, to which Emily had 
time of her noviciation, was also entirely suspected, from her phrensied confession of 
ignorant of the truth. The deep remorse murder, that she had been instrumentai in 
that seized on the mind of Laurentini, to- the castle of Udolpho, Laurentini was inno- 
gether with the suiferings of disappointed cent ; and she had herself been deceived con- 
passion, for she still loved the marquis, again ceming the spectacle that formerly occasioned 
unsetded her intellect ; and after the first her so much terror, and had since compelled 
paroxysms of despair were passed, a heavy her, for a while; to attribute the horrors of 
and silent melancholy had settled upon her the nun to a consciousness of a murder com- 
spirits, which suffered few interruptions from mitted in that castle. 

fits of phrensy till the time of her death. It may be remembered that in a chamber 
Diuing many years, it had been her only of Udolpho hung a black veil, whose singular 
amusement to walk in the woods near the situation had excited Emily's curiosity, and 
monastery, in the solitary hours of night, and which afterwards disclosed an object that had 
to play upon a favourite instrument, to which overwhelmed her with horror ; for, on lifting 
she sometimes joined the delightful melody of it, there appeared, instead of the pictiure she 
her voice in the most solemn and melancholy had expected, within a recess of the wall, a 
airs of her native country, modulated by all human figure, of ghastly paleness, stretched 
the energetic feeling that dwelt in her heart, at its length, and dressed in the habiliments 
The physician who had attended her recom- of the grave. What added to the horror of 
mended it to the superior to indulge her in the spectacle, was, that the face appeared 
this whim, as the only means of soothing her partly decayed and disfigured by worms, 
distempered fancy ; and she was suffered to which were visible on the features and hands, 
walk in the lonely hours of night, attended by On such an object it will . be readily believed 
the servant who had accompanied her from that no person could endure to look twice. 
Italy ; but as the indulgence transgressed Emily, it may be recollected, had, after the 
against the rules of the convent, it was kept first glance, let the veil drop, and her terror 
as secret as possible ; and thus the mysterious had prevented her from ever after provoking 
music of Laurentini had combined, with other a renewal of such suffering as she had then 
circumstances, to produce a report that not experienced. Had she dared to look again, 
only the chateau, but its neighbourhood, was her delusion and her fears would have vanished 
haunted, together, and she would have perceived that 

Soon after her entrance into this holy com- the figtire before her was not htmian, but 
munity, and before she had shown any symp- formed of wax. The history of it is some- 
toms of insanity there, she made a will, in what extraordinary, though not without ex^ 
which, after bequeathing a considerable legacy ample in the records of that fierce severity 
to the convent, she divided the remainder of which monkish superstition luis sometimes 
her personal property, which her jewels made inflicted on mankind. A member of the house 
very valuable, between the wife of Mons. of Udolpho having committed some offence 
Bonnac, who was an Italian lady, and her re- against the prerogative of the church, had 
lation, and the nearest surviving relative of been condemned to the penance of contem- 
the late Marchioness de Villeroi. As Emily plating, during certain hours of the day, a 
St. Aubert was not only the nearest but the waxen image, made to resemble a human 
sole relative, this legacy descended to her, and body in the state to which it is reduced after 
thus explained to her the whole mystery of death. This penance, serving as a memento 
her father's conduct. of the condition at which he must himsdf 

The resemblance between Emily and her arrive, had been designed to reprove the pride 
unfortunate aunt had frequently been observed of the Marquis of Udolpho, which had 
by Laurentini, and had occasioned the sin- formerly so much exasperated that of the 
gular behaviour which had formerly alarmed Romish church ; and he had not only super- 
her : but it was in the nun's dying hour, when stititiously observed this penance himself, 
her conscience gave her perpetually the idea which he had believed was to obtain a pardoa 
of the marchioness, that she became more for all his sins, but had made it a condition in 
sensible than ever of this Ukeness, and in her his will, that his descendants should preserve 
phrenzy deemed it no resemblance of the per- the image on pain of forfeiting to the church 
son she had injured, but the original herself, a certain part of his domain, that they also 
The bold assertion that had followed on the might profit by the humiliating morsd it coq- 



154 



THE MYSTERIES OP UDOLPtiO. 



veyed. The figure, therefore, had been suf- 
fered to retain its station in the wall of the 
chamber ; but his descendants excused them- 
selves from observing the penance to which 
he had been enjoined. 

l*his image was so horriby natural, that it 
is not surprising that Emily should have mis- 
taken it for the object it resembled ; nor, since 
she had heard such an extraordinary account 
concerning the disappearing of the late lady 
of thfe castle, and had such experience of the 
character of Montoni, that she should have 
believed this to be the miurdered body of the 
Lady Laurentini, and that he had been the 
contriver of her death. 

The situation in whidi she had discovered 
it occasioned her at first much surprise and 
perplexity ; but the vigilance with which the 
doors of the chamber where it was deposited 
were afterwards secured, had compelled her 
to believe that Montoni, not daring to confide 
the secret of her death to any person, had 
suffered her remains to decay m Uus obscure 
chamber. The ceremony of the veil, how- 
ever, and the circumstance of the doors having 
been left open even for a moment, had occa- 
sioned her much wonder and some doubts ; 
but these were not sufficient to overcome her 
suspicion of Montoni ; and it v^as the dread 
of his terrible vengeance that had sealed her 
lips in silence concerning what she had seen 
in the west chamber. 

Emily, in discovering the Marchioness de 
Villeroi to have been the sister of Mons. St. 
Aubert, was variously affect^ ; but, amidst 
the sorrow which she suffered for her untimely 
death, she was released from an anxious and 
painful conjecture, occasioned by the rash as- 
sertion of Signora Laurentini, concerning her 
birth and the honour of her parents. Her 
faith in St Aubert's principles would scarcely 
allow her to suspect that he had acted dis- 
honourably ; and she felt such reluctance to 
believe herself the daughter of any other than 
her whom she had always considered and 
loved as a mother, that she would hardly 
admit such a circumstance to be possible : yet 
the likeness which it had frequently been 
affirmed she bore to the late marchioness, the 
former behaviour of Dorothee the old house- 
keeper, the assertion of Laurentini, and the 
mysterious attachment which St. Aubert had 
discovered, awakened doubts as to his con- 
nection with the marchioness, which her rea- 
son could neither vanquish nor confirm. From 
these, however, she was now relieved, and all 
the circumstances of her father's conduct 
were fully explained : but her heart was 
oppressed by the melancholy catastrophe of 
her amiable relative, and by the awful lesson 
which the historv of the nun exhibited, the 
indulgence of whose passions had been the 
means of leading her gradually to the com- 
mission of a crime, from the prophecy of 
which in her early years she would have re- 



coiled in horror, and exdaimed — that it could 
liot be! — ^a crime, which whole years of 
repentance and of the severest penance had 
not been able to obhterate from her con- 
science. 



CHAPTER LVI. 

'.....-.... Then, fresh tears 
Stxx>d on her cheek, as doth the honey-dew 
Upon a gather'd lily almost wither*d. 

Shajcbspbark. 

After the late discoveries, Emily was dis- 
tinguished at the chateau by the count and 
his family as a relative of the house of VUle- 
roi, and received, if possible, more friendly 
attention than had 3ret been ^own her. 

Count de Villefort's siuprise at the delay of 
an answer to his letter, which h£ul been 
directed to Valancourt at Estuviere, yrzs 
mingled with satisfaction for the prudence 
which had saved Emily from a share of the 
anxiety he now suffered ; though, when he 
saw her still drooping under die effect of his 
former error, all his resolution was necessary 
to restrain him from relating the truth, that 
would afford her a momentary relief. The 
approaching nuptials of the Lady Blanche 
now divided his attention with this subject of 
his anxiety ; for the inhabitants of the chateau 
were already busied in preparations for that 
event, and the arrival of Mons. St. Foix vras 
daily expected. In the gaiety which sur- 
rounded her, Emily vainly tried to participate, 
her spirits being depressed by the late dis- 
coveries, and by the anxiety concerning the 
fate of Valancourt, that had been occasioned 
by the description of his manner when, he had 
delivered the ring. She seemed to perceive 
in it the gloomy wildness of despair ; and 
when she conadered to what that despair 
might have urged him, her heart sunk with 
terror and grief. The state of suspense, as 
to his safety, to which she believed herself 
condemned till she should return to La 
Valine, appeared insupportable ; and, in such 
moments, she could not even struggle to as- 
sume the composure that had left her mind, 
but would often abruptly quit the company 
she Mias with, and endeavour to soothe her 
spirits in the deep solitudes of the woods that 
overbrowed the shore. Here the faint roar of 
foaming waves that beat below, and the sullen 
murmur of the wind among the branches 
around, were cu'cumstances in unison with 
the temper of her mind ; and she would sit 
on a cliff, or on the broken steps of her 
favoiuite watch-tower, observing the changing 
colours of the evening clouds, and the gloom 
of twilight draw over the sea, till the white 
tops of billows, riding towards the shore, 
could scarcely be discerned amidst the 
darkened waters. The lines engraved by 



THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 



T55 



Valancourt on this tower, she frequently re- 
peated with melancholy enthusiasm, and then 
would endeavour to check the recollections 
and the grief they occasioned, and to turn 
her thoughts to indifferent subjects. 

One evening, having wandered with her 
lute to this her favourite spot, she entered the 
ruined tower, and ascended a winding stair- 
case that led to a small chamber which was 
less decayed than the rest of the building, and 
whence she had often gazed with admiration 
on the wide prospect of sea and land that ex- 
tended below. The sun was now setting on 
that tract of the Pyrenees which divides Lan- 
guedoc from Roussillon ; and placing herself 
opposite to a small grated window, which, 
like the wood-tops beneath, and the waves 
lower still, gleamed with the red glow of the 
west, she touched the chords of her lute in 
solemn symphony, and then accompanied it 
■ with her voice in one of the simple and affect- 
ing airs to which, in happier days, Valancomt 
had often listened in rapture, and whicli she 
now adapted to the following lines : 

TO MELANCHOLY. 

Spirit of love and sorrow— hail I 
Thy solemn voice from far I hear. 

Mingling with evening's d3ang gale : 
Hail, with this sadly-pleasing tear I 

O ! at this still, this lonely hour. 
Thine own sweet hour of closing day. 

Awake thy lute, whose charmful power 
Shall call up Fancy to obey ; 

To jpaint the wild romantic dream 
That meets the poet's musing eye, 

As on the bank of shadowy stream 
He breathes to her the fervid sigh. 

lonely spirit 1 let thy song 

Lead me through all th^ sacred haunt ; 
The minster's moonlight aisles along, 
Where spectres raise the midnight chaunt ! 

1 hear their dirges faintly swell 1 
Then, sink at once in silence drear, 

While, from the pillar'd cloister's cell, 
Dimly their gliding forms appear t 

Lead where the pine-woods wave on high. 
Whose pathless sod is darkly seen. 

As the cold moon with trembling eye, 
Darts her long beams the leaves between. 

Lead to the mountain's dusky head, 
Where, far below, in shade profound, 

Wide forests, plains, and hamlets spread, 
And sad the chimes of vesper sound. 

Or guide me where the dashing oar 
Just breaks the stillness of the vale. 

As slow it tracks the winding shore. 
To meet the ocean's distant sail : 

To pebbly banks, that Neptune laves 
With measured surges loud and deep. 

Where the dark cliff bends o'er the waves. 
And wild the winds of autumn sweep. 

There pause at midnight's ^ectered hour, 
And Ust the long -resounding gale ; 

And catch the fleeting moonlight's power. 
O'er foaming seas and distant sail. 

The soft tranquillity of the scene below, 



where the evening breeze scarcely curled the 
water, or swelled the passing sail that caught 
the last gleam of the sun, and where, now 
and then, a dipping oar was all that disturbed 
the trembling radiance, conspired with the 
tender melody of her lute to lull her mind 
into a state of gentle sadness ; and she sung 
the mournful songs of past times, till the 
remembrances they awakened were too power- 
ful for her heart, her tears fell upon the lute, 
over which she drooped, and her voice trem- 
bled, and was unable to proceed. 

Though the sun had now sunk behind the 
mountains, and even his reflected light was 
fading from their highest points, Emily did 
not leave the watch-tower, but continued to 
indulge her melancholy reverie, till a footstep 
at a little distance startled her, and on look- 
ing through the grate she observed a person 
walking below, whom, however, soon per- 
ceiving to be Mons. Bonnac, she returned to 
the quiet thoughtfulness his step had inter- 
rupted. After some time she again struck 
her lute, and sung her favourite air ; but again 
a step disturbed her, and, as she paused to 
listen, she heard it ascending the staircase of 
the tower. The gloom of the hour, perhaps, 
made her sensible to some degree of fear, 
which she might not otherwise have felt ; for 
only a few minutes before she had seen Mons. 
Bonnac pass. The steps were quick and 
bounding, and in the next moment the door 
of the chamber opened, and a person entered 
whose features were veiled in tne obscurity of 
twilight ; but his voice could not be concealed, 
for it was the voice of Valancourt I At the 
sound, never heard by Emily without emotion, 
she started in terror, as^nishment, and doubt- 
ful pleasure ; and had scarcely beheld him at 
her feet, when she sunk into a seat, overcome 
by the various emotions that contended at her 
heart, and almost insensible to that voice 
whose earnest and trembling calls seemed as 
if endeavouring to save her. Valancourt, as 
he hung over Emily, deplored his own rash 
impatience in having thus surprised her : for 
when he arrived at the chateau, too anxious 
to await the return of the count, who, he 
understood, was in the grounds, he went him- 
self to seek him, when, as he passed the 
tower, he was struck by the sound of Emily's 
voice, and immediately ascended. 

It was a considerable time before she re- 
vived ; but when her recollection returned, she 
repulsed his attentions with an air of reserve, 
and inquired, with as much displeasure as it 
was possible she could feel in these first 
moments of his appearance, the occasion of 
his visit. 

' Ah, Emily I' said Valancourt, ' that air, 
those words — ^alas ! I have, then, little to hope 
— when you ceased to esteem me, you ceased 
also to love me I' 

' Most true, sir,' replied Emily, endeavour- 
ing to command her trembling voice ; ' and if 



IS6 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO, 

you had valued my esteem, you would not have duct, and that no explanation had yet 

given me this new occasion for uneasiness.' given. But while she acknowledged thi 

Valancourt's countenance changed suddenly heart would not allow her to dwell 

fiom the anxieties of doubt to an expression moment on thepossibility of hisunworth 

of surprise and dismay ; he was silent a his look, his voice, his manner, all spo 

moment, and then said, ' I had been taught noble sincerity which had formerly i 

to hope for a very diiferent reception ! Is it guished him ; and she again permittee 

then true, Emily, that I have lost your regard self to indulge the emotions of a joy 

for ever ? Am I to believe that though your surprising and powerful than she hac 

esteem for me may return — yoiu* affection before experienced, 

never can? Can the count have meditated Neither Emily nor Valancourt wen 

the cruelty which now tortiu'es me with a scious how they reached the chateau, w! 

second death y they might have been transferred by thi 

The voice in which he spoke this alarmed of a fairy, for anything they could rem^ 

Emily as much as his words surprised her, and and it was not till they had reached the 

with trembling impatience she begged that he hall that either of them recollected then 

would explain them. other persons in the world besides them: 

• Can any explanation be necessary?* said The count then came forth with si 

Valancourt : ' do you not know how cruelly and with the joyfulness of pure benev 

my conduct has been misrepresented? that to welcome Valancourt, and to entrc 

the actions of which you once believed me forgiveness of the injustice he had done 

guilty (and, O Emily I how could you so soon after which Mons. Bonnac join< 

degrade me in your opinion, even for a mo- happy group, in which he and Valai 

ment ?) — those actions I hold in as much con- were mutually rejoiced to meet, 

tempt and abhorrence as yoursdf? Are you, When the first congratulations were 

indeed, ignorant that Count de Villefort has and the general joy became somewhat 

detected the slanders that have robbed me of tranquil, the count withdrew with Valai 

all I hold dear on earth, and has invited me tothelibrary, where a long conversation i 

hither to justify to you my former conduct ? between them ; in which the latter so < 

It is surely impossible you can be uninformed justified himself of the criminal parts 

of these circumstances, and I am again tor- conduct imputed to him, and so candidl 

turing myself with a false hope 1' fessed and so feelingly lamented the 

The silence of Emily confirmed this sup- which he had committed, that the coui 

position ; for the deep twilight would not confirmed in his belief of all he had h 

allow Valancourt to distinguish the astonish- and while he perceived so many noble ^ 

ment and doubting joy that fixed her features, in Valancourt, and that experience had 1 

For a moment she continued unable to speak ; him to detest the follies which before 1: 

then a profound sigh seemed to give some only not admired, he did not scruple 

relief to her spirits, and she said, lieve that he would pass through life wi 

' Valancourt ! I was till this moment ignorant dignity of a wise and good man, or to i 

of all the circumstances you have mentioned ; to his care the future happiness of Em 

the emotion I now suffer may assure you of Aubert, for whom he felt the solicitude 

the truth of this, and that though I had ceased parent. Of this he soon informed hei 

to esteem, I had not taught myself entirely to short conversation, when Valancourt ha 

forget you.' him. While Emily listened to a relat 

I This moment !' said Valancourt in a low the services that Valancourt had rer 

voice, and leaning for support against the Mons. Bonnac, her eyes overflowed witl 

window — ' this moment brings with it a con- of pleasure ; and the further conversat 

viction that overpowers me ! — I am dear to Count de Villefort perfectly dissipated 

you, then — still dear to you, my Emily !' doubt, as to the past and future cond 

; ' Is it necessary that I should telUyou so?* him, to whom she now restored, virithou 

she replied : ' is it necessary that I should say the esteem and affection with which si 

— these are the first moments of joy I have formerly received him. 

know since your departure, and that they re- When they returned to the supper-roo 

pay me for all those of pain I have suffered countess and Lady Blanche met Valai 

in the interval ?' with sincere congratulations ; and B] 

Valancourt sighed deeply, and was unable indeed was so much rejoiced to see Em 

to reply ; but as he pressed her hand to his turned to happiness, as to forget for a 

lips, the tears that fell over it spoke a Ian- that Mons. St Foix was not yet arri^ 

guage which could not be mistaken, and to the chateau, though he had been expeci 

which words were inadequate. some hours ; but her generous sympatl 

Emily, somewhat tranquillized, proposed soon after rewarded by his appearance 

returning to the chateau ; and then, for the was now perfectly recovered from the w 

first time, recollected that the count had in- received during his perilous adventure s 

yited Valancourt thither to explain 1||§ con- the Pyrenees, the mention of which ser 



THE MYSTERIES OF U DO LP HO, IS7 

heighten to the parties who had been involved were illuminated with brilliant festoons o* 

in it, the sense of their present happiness, lamps, and gazed on the splendid dresses of 

New congratulations passed between them, the dancers, the costly Uveries of the attend- 

and round the supper-table appeared a group ants, the canopies of purple velvet and gold, 

of faces smiling with felicity, but with a and listened to the gay strains that floated 

felicity which had in each a different character, along the vaulted roof, she almost fancied her- 

The smile of Kanche was frank and gay, that self in an enchanted palace, and declared that 

of Emily tender and pensive ; Valancourt's she had not met with any place which charmed 

was rapturous, tender, and gay, alternately : her so much, since she read the fairy tales ; 

Mons. St. Foix's was joyous ; and that of the nay, that the fairies themselves, at their nighdy 

count, as he looked on the surrounding party, revels in this old hall, could display nothing 

expressed the tempered complacency of bene- finer ; while old Dorothee, as ^e surveved 

volence ; while the features of the countess, the scene, sighed, and said the castle looked 

'Henri, and Mons. Bonnac, discovered fainter as it was wont to do in the time of her youth, 

traces of animation. Poor Mons. du Pont After gracing the festivities of Chateau-le- 

did not, by his presence, throw a shade of re- Blanc for some days, Valancourt and Emily 

gret over the company, for when he had dis- took leave of their friends, and returned to La 

covered that Valantourt was not unworthy of Valine, where the faidiful Theresa received 

the esteem of Emily, he determined seriously them with unfeigned joy, and the pleasant 

to endeavour at the conquest of his own hope- shades welcomed them with a thousand tender 

less affection, and had immediately withdrawn and affecting remembrances ; and while they 

from Chateau-le- Blanc — a conduct which wandered together over the scenes so long in- 

Emily now understood, and rewarded with her habited by the late Mons. and Madame St. 

admiration and pity. Aubert, and Emily pointed out with pensive 

The count and his guests continued to- affection their favourite haunts, her present 

gether till a late hour, yielding to the delights happiness was heightened by considering, that 

of social gaiety and to the sweets of friend- it would have been worthy of their approba- 

ship. When Annette heard of the arrival of tion, could they have witnessed it. 

Valancourt, Ludovico had some difficulty to Valancourt led her to the plane-tree on the 

prevent ' her going into the supper-room to terrace, where he had first ventured to declare 

express her joy, for she declared that she had his love, and where now the remembrance of 

never been so rejoiced at any accident as this, the anxiety he had then suffered, and the re- 

since she had found Ludovico himself, trospect of all the dangers and misfortunes 

they had each encountered, since last they sat 

*■" together beneath its broad branches, exalted 

the sense of their present felicity, which, on 
CHAPTER LVn, this spot, sacred to the memory of St. Aubert, 
• Now my task is smoothly done. ^l^y solemnly vowed to deserve, as far as pos- 
I can fly, or I caiurun sible, by endeavouring to imitate his benevo- 
Quickly to the green earth's end, . lence,— by remembering, that superior attain- 
Where the bow'd welkin low doth bend ; ments of every sort bring with them duties of 
And. from thence, can soar as soon superior exertion, — and by affording to their 
To the corners of the moon. fellow-beings, together with that portion of 

^ ' ordinary coniforts which prosperity always 

THEmarriagesof the Lady Blanche and Emily owes to misfortune, the example of lives 

St. Aubert were celebrated on the same day, passed in happy thankfulness to God, and, 

and with the ancient baronial magnificence, therefore, in careful tenderness to His creatures. 

It Chateau-le- Blanc. The feasts were held in Soon after their return to La Vall^, the 

the great hall of the castle, which on this oc- brother of Valancourt came to congratulate 

::asion was hung with superb new tapestry, him on his marriage, and to pay his respects 

•epresenting the exploits of Charlemagne and to Emily, with whom he was so much pleased, 

lis twelve peers : here were seen the Saracens, as well as with the prospect of rational hap- 

Yith their horrible visors advancing to battle ; piness which these nuptials offered to Valan- 

md there were displayed the wild solemnities court, that he immediately resigned to him a 

3f incantation, and the necromantic feats part of the rich domain, the whole of which, 

exhibited by the magician Jarl before the as he had no family, would of course descend 

emperor. The sumptuous banners of the to his brother on his decease. 

"amily of Villeroi, which had long slept in The estates at Thoulouse were disposed of, 

lust, were once more unfurled, to wave over and Emily purchased of Mons. Quesnd the 

he Gothic points of painted casements ; and ancient domain of her late father, where, 

imsic echoed in many a lingering close, having given Annette a marriage portion, she 

through every winding gallery and colonnade settled her as the housekeeper, and Ludovico 

)f that vast edifice. as the steward :»but since both Valancourt 

As Annette looked down from the corridor and herself preferred the pleasant and long- 

ipon the ball, whose arches and windows loved shades of La Valine to th^ magnificence 



xs8 THE MYSTERIES OF UDOLPHO. 

6f Epourvflle, they continued to reside there, the securest felicity of this life, that of aspir 

passing, however, a few months in the year ing to mcNal uid labouring for intellectual im 

at the birth-place of St. Aubert, in tender provement — ^to the pleasures of enlightenec 

respect to his memory. society, and to the exercise of the benevoleno 

The legacy which had been bequeathed to which had always animated their hearts ; whOii 

Emily by Signor Laurentini, she begged the bowers of L^ Vall^ became once mon 

Valancourt would allow her to resign to the retreat of goodness, wisdom, and domesti< 

Mons. Bonnac ; and Valancourt, when she blessedness ! 

made the request, felt all the value of the O I useful may it be to have shown, tha 

compliment it conveyed. The castle of Udol- though the vicious can sometimes pour afflic 

pho, also, descended to the wife of Mons. tion upon the good, their power is transien 

Bonnac, who was the nearest surviving rela- and their punishment certain ; and that inno 

tion of the house of that name ; and thus cence, though oppressed by injustice, shall 

affluence restored his long oppressed spirits supported by patience, finally triiunph ove 

to peace, and his family to comfort. misfortune ! 

O I how joyful it is to tell of happiness such And if the weak hand that has recordec 

as that of Valancourt and Emily ; to relate this tale, has by its scenes, beguiled th« 

that, aftersufferinjgf under the oppression of the mourner of one hour of sorrow, or by it 

vicious and the disdain of the weak, they were moral, taught him to sustain it — the effort 

at length restored to each other — to the be- however humble, has not been vain, nor is th« 

loved landscape of their native country — to writer unrewarded. 



» THE BKDb 



BILLING AWD SONS, PKINTBRS, Ot^ILDFORD, SURRSV. 



. . ■■■! ^ ^^^ 



ROUTLEDGE'S SIXPENNY NOVELS. 



By CAPTAIN MARRYAT. 



The King's Own. 
Peter Simple. 
Jacob Faithful* 



The Waterwitch. 
The Pathfinder. 
The Deerslayer. 
Last of the Mohicans. 
The Pilot. 
The Prairie. 
Eve Effingham* 
The Spy. 
The Red Rover. 



Pacha of Many Tales. 
Newton Forster. 
Japhet in Search of a 
Father. 

By J. F. COOPER. 

Homeward Bound. 
The Two Admirals. 
Miles Wallingford. 
The Pioneers, 
Wyandotte. 
Lionel Lincoln. 
Afloat and Ashore. 
The Bravo. 
The Sea Lions. 
The Headsman. 



Frank Mildmay. 
Midshipman Easy. 
The Dog Fiend. 



Precautloii. 
Oak Openings. 
The Heidenmauer, 
Mark's Reef, 
Ned Myers. 
Satanstoe. 
The Borderers, 
Jack Tier. 
MercedeSi 



By 

Guy Mannering. ( 
The Antiquary, j 
Ivanhoew 

The Fortunes of Nigel. 
Rob Roy. 
Kenilworth. -' 
The Pirate. 
The Monastery. 
Old MortaUty. > 



Sir WALTER SCOTT. 
PeverilofthePeak. i;rhe Abbot * 



Heart of Midlothian. 
The Bride of Lam» 

mermoor. 
Waverley. ^ 

Quentin Durward. 
St. Ronan's WelL 
L^end of Montrose, 

and Black Dwarf. 



Woodstock. 
Redgauntlet. 
Count Robert of Paris. 
The Talisman. 
Surgeon's Daughter. 
Fair Maid of Perth. 
Anne of Geierstein. 
The Betrothed. 



By VARIOUS AUTHORS.' 



Robinson Crusoe j 
Uncle Tom's Cabin. Mrs. Stewe, 
Colleen Bawn. Gerald Griffin, 
The Vicar of Wakefield. 
Sketch Book. Washington Irving. 
Tristram Shandy. Sterne, 

Sentimental Journey. Sterne, 
The English Opium Eater. 

De Quincy, 
Essa3rs of Elia, Charles Lamb, 
Roderick Random. Smollett. 

Autocrat of the Breakfast Table. 
Tom Jones. 2 vols. Fielding, 



Artemus Ward, his Book. 

A. Ward among the Mormons. 

The Nasby Papers. 

Major Jack Downing. 

The Biglow Papers. 

Orpheus C. Kerr. 

The Wide, Wide World. 

Queechy. 

Gulliver's Travels. 

The Wandering Jew. (3 vols. ) 

The Mysteries of Paris. (3 vols. ) 

The Lamplighter. 

Professor at the Breakfast Table. 



Published by George Routledge and Sons. 



NOVELS AT ONE SHILLING. 



I 



By CAPTAIN MARRYAT. 



• Peter Simply 
I The Kinfifs Owni 
^ Midshipman Easy. 

Rattlin the Reefer. 

Pacha of Many Tales. 

NewtMkForster. 



Jacob FaithfuL 
The Dog-Fiend. 
Japhet in Search of a 

Father. 
Tlie Poacher. 
The Phantom Ship. 



Percival Kecne. 
Valerie. 

Frank Mildmay. 
Olla Podrida. 
Monsieur Violet. 



By W. H. AINSWORTH. 



Windsor Castle. 
Tower of London. . 
The Miser's Daughter. 
Rookwood. 
Old St. Paul's. 
CrichtoUi 

. By 

The Pilot 

Last of the Mohicans. 
The Pioneers. 
The Red Rover. 
The Spy: 
Lionel Lincoln. 
The Deerslayer. 
The Pathfinder. 
The Bravo. 

By 

Three Musketeers. 

Twenty Years After. 

Doctor Basilius. 

The Twin Captains. 

Captain Paul. 

Memoirs of a Phy- 
sician. 2 vols, {is, 
each). 

The Chevalier dc Mai- 
son Rouge. 

Queen's Necklace. 



Guy Fawkes. 
The Spendthrift:. 
James the Second. 
Star Chamber. 
Flitch of Bacon. 
Lancashire Witches. 



I Mervyn Clitheroe. 
I Ovingdean Grange, 

St James's. 

Auriol. 

Jack Sheppard. 



J. PENIMORB COOPER. 



The Waterwitch. 
Two Admirals. 
Satanstoe. 
Afloat and Ashore. 
Wyandotte. 
Eve Effingham. 
Miles Wallingford. 
The Headsman. 
The Prairie. 

ALE^CANDRE DUMAS. 



Homeward Bound. 
The Borderers. 
The Sea Lions. 
Heidenmauer. 
Precaution. 
Oak Openings. 
Mark's Reef. 
Ned Myers. 



North anger Abbey. 
Emma. 



Ennui. 



I 



Countess de Charny. 

Monte Cristo. 2 vols, 
(ij; each). 

Nan on. 

The Two Dianas. 

The Black Tulip. 

Forty - Five Guards- 
men. 

Taking of the Bastile. 
2 vols. ( I J. each). 

Chicot the Jester. 

By MRS. GORE. 
The Ambassador's Wife. 

By JANE AUSTEN. 
Pride and Prejudice. 
Sense iand Sensibility. 

By MARIA EDGEWORTH. 
Vivian, | The Absentee. 



The Conspirators. 
Ascanio. [Savoy. 

Page of the Duke of 
Isabel of Bavaria. 
Beau Tancrede. 
Regent's Daughter. 
Pauline. 

Catherine Blum. 
Ingenue. 
Russian Gipsy. 
Watchmaker. 



Mansfield Park. 



I Manoeuvring. 



Published by George Routledge and Sons. 



I 


